PDF PAGE 1
HUMAN EVOLUTION Vol. 1 - N. 4 (361-379) 1986 
B. J. King 
Department o[ Anthropology 
University o~ Oklahoma 
Norman, OK 73019 
U.S.A. 
Key words: extractive foraging, 
primate intelligence, cognition, 
hominoid evolution. 
Extractive Foraging and the Evolution of 
Primate Intelligence 
One of the two major theories regarding the evolution of intelli- 
gence in primates is that feeding strategies determine mental 
development. Evidence for this theory is reviewed and related to 
extractive foraging, which is the act of locating and/or processing 
embedded foods such as underground roots and insects or hard- 
shelled nuts and fruits. It is shown that, although only cebus 
monkeys and chimpanzees in the wild use tools in extractive 
foraging, many other species of mammals (including primates) and 
birds are capable of extracting embedded foods without tools. 
Extractive foraging by primates is compared to extractive forag- 
ing by other mammals and birds to assess whether: 1) extractive 
foraging involves cognition, and 2) extractive foraging by pri- 
mates is unique in a way that may mean it played a role in the 
development of intelligence among primates. This comparison 
reveals that some acts of extractive foraging by nonprimates are 
equally sophisticated as those of primates. It is suggested that 
extractive foraging played no significant role in the evolution of 
primate intelligence. Hypotheses for testing precise differences in 
extractive foraging ability across taxa are offered, and the roles of 
olfactory cues, manual dexterity, and strength in extractive forag- 
ing are evaluated. 
In conclusion, the hominization process is briefly reviewed in 
relation to foraging behavior. A ~package~ of traits that, in 
combination, is unique to hominids is discussed: tool-aided ex- 
tractive foraging, division of labor by sex with food exchange, 
and feeding of juveniles. 
Introduction 
Speculation about selection pressures leading to the evolution of primate intelligence 
has proceeded along two major lines (McGREW, 1981). One position has emphasized 
complex social life, including the need for kin recognition and prediction of future 
interactions, as the key factor in the evolution of primate intelligence (ALEXANDER, 1979; 
BECK, 1982; HUMPHREY, 1976: JOLLY, 1966; KUMMER, 1982). This view has received 
considerable attention from anthropologists and zoologists during the past four decades 
(GROoK, 1982). More recently, however, several papers have focused on the relationship 
between foraging behavior and cognitive ability in nonhuman primates and have suggested 
that feeding strategies are primary determinants of intelligence (CLuTToN-BROCK & 
HARVEY, 1980; MILTON, 1981; PARKER & GIBSON, 1977, 1979), 
MILTON (1981) proposed that the need to search for patchily distributed foods in the 
tropical forest was the critical stimulus for the development of increased cranial capacity 
and mental development in higher primates. She compared foraging behavior between 
populations of howler (Alouatta palliata) and spider monkeys (Ateles geoffroyi). Spider 
monkeys, which eat fruit with patchy distribution, have a greater relative brain size and 
degree of neural complexity as well as a longer period of maternal dependence than howler 


PDF PAGE 2
362 KING 
monkeys, whose diet is more folivorous. CLUTTON-BRoCK 8r HARVEY (1980) found that 
the trend of greater cerebral expansion among more frugivorous species as opposed to 
more folivorous ones held across the primate order. Similar findings were demonstrated 
for chiroptera (EISENBERG & WILSON, 1978; PIRLOT 8~ POTTIER, 1977) and some rodents 
(MACE et al., 1981). 
PARKER & GIBSON (1977, 1979) examined not only how food is distributed in the 
environment but also how food is located and processed. They proposed that primate 
intelligence evolved in response to the need for locating and processing food <<encased in a 
shell or... embedded in a solid matrix such as the earth>> (1979:31). Such behavior is 
referred to as extractive foraging. There are two components of extractive foraging which 
may occur independently: 1) locating a food source within its matrix, and 2) processing the 
edible part(s) for consumption. Examples of extractive foraging, which can be thought of 
as obtaining embedded or <<hidden)> foods, include digging up underground roots or social 
insects such as termites, opening hard-shelled fruits, and turning over stones to eat fungi 
or arthropods (McGREW, 1981). 
PARKER & GIBSON (1977) used a Piagetian framework to evaluate the level of 
intelligence reflected in the foraging strategies of various species. One of their major 
conclusions was that extractive foraging with complex object manipulation ~, including the 
use of tools, is found only in wild cebus monkeys (Cebus spp.) and chimpanzees (Pan 
troglodytes). Cebus monkeys use rocks to open oysters (HERNANDEZ-CAMACHO & COOPER, 
1976) and chimpanzees obtain insects enclosed in mounds such as termites and ants by 
using twigs or grass probes (GoODALL, 1964; MCGREW, 1979a; MCGREW et aL, 1979; 
MCGREW & ROGERS, 1983; NISHIDA & HIRAIWA, 1982; STRUHSAKER & HUNKELER, 1971; 
SUGIYAMA & KOMAN, 1979; UEHARA, 1982). Chimpanzees also crack open hard-shelled 
nuts using stone <<hammer>> tools and anvils (BoESCH & BOESCH, 1983, 1984). 
The other great apes, the gorilla (Gorilla gorilla) and orangutan (Pongo pygmaeus) use 
tools and complex object manipulation only in captivity. They do extract and eat hidden 
foods in the wild, but they do not use tools. Wild orangutans, for example, open hard- 
shelled fruit and nuts with their teeth (RIJKSEN, 1978; GALOIKAS, 1982), and wild gorillas 
dig holes as deep as 20 cm. to obtain underground bamboo shoots (CASlMm, 1975). 
PARKER & GIBSON (1977) proposed that the pattern of extractive foraging with tools, seen 
only in extant cebus monkeys and chimpanzees, arose independently in the common 
ancestors of cebus monkeys, great apes, and hominids. They contended that this behavior 
is no longer observed among orangutans and gorillas because these apes radiated into 
feeding niches that do not require complex object manipulation. 
By focusing on tool-aided extractive foraging, PARKER & GIBSON largely ignored 
primate species other than cebus monkeys and chimpanzees. Baboons and macaques were 
cited as having <<a propensity for)> occasional complex object manipulation (1977:635), but 
specific examples were not given, and no other primates were mentioned. 
The aim of this paper is to review extractive foraging in those primate species that do 
not use tools in feeding and that use complex object manipulation rarely if at all. 
Specifically, the extractive foraging behavior of such primates will be compared with that 
of nonprimates to assess whether primate extractive foraging is unique in any way that 
may have allowed it to play a role in the development of primate intelligence. In 
conclusion, the significance of extractive foraging in hominoid evolution will be discussed. 
' Defined as: <~Manipulation of one detached object relative to another involving subsequent change 
of state of one or both of the subjects~> (i977:624). 


PDF PAGE 3
EXTRACTIVE FORAGING AND PRIMATE INTELLIGENCE 363 
Extractive foraging: Primates Compared to Other Mammals and Birds. 
Examples of extractive foraging by primates that do not use tools in feeding are 
presented in Table 1. Most of the species listed in the table eat more fruit, insects, or 
herbs than leaves (CLuTTON-BROcK, 1977; RICHARD 1985). Although this list of species 
using extractive foraging is not exhaustive, it is representative in that it is difficult to find 
in the literature examples of extractive foraging among primates that are mainly folivor- 
OUS. 
Until additional examples of extractive foraging in primates are documented, it 
would be premature to conclude that any definite relationship exists between dietary 
composition and the practice of extractive foraging. PARKER & GIBSON (1977:629) 
suggested that tool-aided extractive foraging correlated with omnivory. In fact, most 
reports of primate foraging behavior lack any description or quantification of the propor- 
tion of foods that are <~hiddem~ items and therefore require extraction before consump- 
tion. A significant exception is TERBORGH'S recent book which includes (1983:104) a 
precise reporting of the percentage of <&idden prey)~ eaten by the five primate species he 
studied in Peru. 
However, as is evident from a description of feeding behavior in the gray langur 
(Presbytis entellus), at least some folivores clearly do have little foodsearching or processing 
to carry out before ingestion: ~Langurs eat either directly from the attached branch, 
TABLE 1 - Extractive Foraging Without Tools: Examples among Nonhuman Primates. 
Species, Reference(s) Diet Food item(s) Food extraction technique 
Fork-crowned lemur, Phaner Gummivore ~ Sap and gum Holes dug manually in tree bark 
lucifer (Charles-Dominique 
and Petter, 1980) 
Marmosets, Cebuella spp. and 
Callitrhix spp. (Sussman 
and Kinzey, 1984) 
Aye-aye, Daubentonia mada- 
gascarensis (Hladik, 1979) 
Gummivore 1 Sap and gum 
Insectivore 2 
Saddle-back tamarins, Frugivore/ 
Sagiunus ]uscicollis Gummivore 2 
Yellow-handed titi, Frugivore, 
Callicebus torquatus also insects' 
(Kinzey, 1977) 
Insect larvae 
Young pulp of 
coconut 
Celtis fruit 
Guatteria 
fruit 
Insect 
Nuts 
Palm fruit 
Mandrill, Mandrillus sphinx Omnivore 2 Roots, nuts, 
(Hill, 1966; personal insects, small 
observations) vertebrates 
Holes dug manually or gouded 
with incisors in tree bark 
Crushed inside a hole bitten in 
decaying wood; consumed as juice 
Hole made in coconut with incisors 
Rough exocarp discarded as seed 
and coating are ingested 
Seed and exocarp discarded; 
pulp eaten 
Searched for manually inside tree 
knotholes 
Considerable preparation allows 
removal of hard edible part 
from tough inedible husk 
Incisors used to remove edible 
pericarp from the pit 
Dead leaves, stones and branches 
overturned by hand; holes dug 
in earth 


PDF PAGE 4
364 
(Table 1 continued) 
KING 
Species, Reference(s) Diet Food item(s) Food extraction technique 
Crab-eating macaque, Macaca Frugivore, also Termits Earthern termite broken 
fascicularis (Sussman and leaves 2 upon trees 
Tattersall, 1981) 
Pig-tailed macaque, Macaca 
nemestrina (Crockett and 
Wilson, 1980) 
Lowe's guenon, Cercopithecus 
campbelli (Bourliere et al., 
1970) 
Mangabey, Cercocebus albigena 
(Struhsaker, 1978; Waser, 
1977) 
Other insects 
Crop raiding: 
Tapioca roots 
Corn stalk 
? Insects 
Hamadryas baboon, Papio 
hamadryas (Kummer, 1968) 
Gelada baboon, Theropithecus 
gelada (Dunbar, 1977) 
Anubis baboons, Papio anubis 
(Crook and Aldrich-Blake, 
1968) 
Chacma baboons, Papio ursinis 
(Hamilton et al., 1978) 
Yellow baboons, Papio 
Cynocepbalus 
(Altmann and Altmann, 1970; 
S. Altmann, in press; 
Rhine and Westlund, 1978) 
Frugivore, 
also seeds 
and gum 
Frugivore, also Arthropods, 
insects other insects 
Frugivore, also 
seeds and gum ~ 
Herbs ' 
Herbs/ 
Frugivore, 
also leaves' 
Frugivore, 
also leaves 
Omnivore 2 
Water 
Underground 
roots, bulbs 
of grasses 
Prickly pears 
Figs, seeds 
of acacias 
Insects 
Lizards, scor- 
pions, termites 
Grass corms 
Fruits 
Berries 
Larvae of dung 
fly; fossorial 
mammals 
Rock turned over by hand 
Dug out of earth 
Broken apart to reach ripe 
ears which are then husked 
Folded pinnae of dry leaves of 
palm trees opened; dead wood 
broken up, larvae picked out 
Legume seed pods opened to 
extract larvae; rotten wood 
and bark torn apart and hollow 
sticks searched 
Individual drinking holes dug 
in sands of riverbeds 
Exposed by digging in earth 
Leaf is selected lets spines 
removed; fruit roiled in dry 
earth to remove prickles 
Often buried in sandy soil, 
excavated by hand 
(up to 15 cm. deep) 
Same as above, or, acacia bark 
stripped from trunk 
Stones, wood debris overturned 
by hand 
Dug out of earth manually 
Calyx capsule discarded, spines 
removed 
Edges of plant unfolded 
Dug out of earth manually 
' From Richard, 1985. 
2 From reference noted in left column. 
3 From Clutton-Brock, 1977. 


PDF PAGE 5
EXTRACTIVE FORAGING AND PRIMATE INTELLIGENCE 365 
plucking off the food with fingers or with the mouth, or by breaking off a terminal twig 
and eating from it~ (RIPLEY, 1970:489). The feeding requirements of this folivore are in 
stark contrast to the problems facing, for instance, an African frugivore: ~The fruits of 
most indigenous African plants are small, lacking in fleshy pulp, and are either encased in 
a hard external shell or pod or consist of small seeds with individual, hard protective 
cases~> (WALKER, 1981:63). Insects are often encased or ~&iddem~ in some way as well. As 
JOLLY (1985:59) points out, three major techniques are used by insectivores to capture 
their prey: slow stalking, quick grabbing, and poking into substrates. Calling those 
monkeys that use the last technique <~pokers and pryers~, Jolly notes that they ~unroll 
leaves, search spider webs, chew open dead trunks, prise off bark, and turn over stones~ 
(op. cit.), all acts of extraction. 
Extractive foraging is not limited to primates. In EWER'S (1968, Ch 3) review of 
mammalian food-processing techniques, many examples presented meet the definition of 
extractive foraging. Food is stored for later retrieval by the giant kangaroo rat (Dipodomys 
ingens) and by some species of squirrels (Sciurus spp.) Many rodents extract kernels from 
hard-shelled nuts or seeds. The sea otter (Enhydra lutris) holds flat stones on its chest for 
pounding open mollusks. Mongooses (Herpestes spp.), bears (Ursus spp.), and pigs (Suid 
spp.) dig or root for underground food sources (EwER, 1968; HATLEY & KAPPELMAN, 
1980). 
Certain birds are also extractive foragers. Examples include the marsh tit (Parus 
palustris) (Cowie et al., 1981; Sherry et al., 1981), the black-capped chickadee (Parus 
atricapillus) (Sherry, 1984) and Clark's nutcracker (Nucifraga columbiana) (Vander Wall, 
1982), all of which cache food for future recovery. 
Given these examples, two related questions arise. One, does extractive foraging 
imply any special cognitive abilities? Two, in what way, if any, is extractive foraging 
related to the evolution of intelligence within the primate order? These questions are 
considered by focusing on Menzel and Wyer's (1981) four criteria for assessing the 
presence of cognition in animal foraging behavior: 
1. ability to take into account stimuli that are temporarily absent 
2. absence of a 1:1 correlation between stimulus and response 
3. ability to remember and plan ahead 
4. ability to process and react to a large number of variables simultaneously. 
In order to evaluate whether extractive foraging ever meets these criteria, an 
example of feeding on corms by baboons (Papio cynocephalus) (Rhine and Westlund, 1978: 
69-72) is examined. Baboons dig to expose the corms hidden underground (criterion 1); 
different individuals use different excavation techniques (criterion 2); and animals often 
dig near remains of sedges dropped on previous days (criterion 3). Menzel and Wyer's 
fourth criterion is more ambiguous than the others, but the need for ~skilled hand-eye- 
teeth coordination used in obtaining corms~ (Rhine & Westlund, 1978:72) suggests that 
baboons do have the ability to monitor several variables at once. Some of these points 
were made originally by McGrew (1979b:393), who pointed out that Parker and Gibson 
(1979) underestimated the extractive foraging skills of baboons. 
For most of the examples of extractive foraging by primates listed in Table 1, 
sufficient information is not available in the original source to assess whether all four 
criteria for cognition are met. However, all examples meet the first criterion and many 
examples satisfy other of the remaining criteria. Menzel and Wyers neither state nor 
imply that all four factors must be present in order to assert that the foraging behavior in 
question involves cognition. Using their criteria, therefore, one concludes that cognition is 
involved in extractive foraging without tools as performed by some primates. 


PDF PAGE 6
366 KING 
The important question now becomes whether birds and non-primate mammals ever 
use cognition in extractive foraging. When comparisons are made across taxa, it is usually 
argued that extractive foraging of primates is qualitatively different from that of other 
mammals and birds. McGREw (1981:147), for example, who discusses primate extractive 
foraging, claims: ~Other species practice extractive foraging, e.g. squirrels with nuts, sea 
otters with abalones, but only in a limited and stereotyped way compared to the 
opportunistic, omnivorous monkeys and apes~. 
This statement may be correct but has not yet been demonstrated conclusively. If a 
mammal or bird performs an act of extractive foraging and in so doing meets one or more 
of Menzel and Wyer's criteria for cognition, it is not meaningful to differentiate that act 
from one of primate extractive foraging by evoking poorly defined qualitative differences. 
The same set of criteria must be consistently applied to all cases of extractive foraging in 
order to determine similarities and differences across species. 
One example of extractive foraging in a bird is examined against Menzel and Wyer's 
criteria, as was done for baboons. VANDER WALL'S (1982) account of cache recovery 
behavior in Clark's nutcracher is a complete report amenable to such analysis. Nutcrackers 
recover seeds buried in the earth with no sensory cues (criterion 1); they use two or more 
objects as visual landmarks for locating the seeds (criterion 2); and they rely on memory 
for seed recovery (criterion 3). That memory is in fact involved in cache recovery is 
supported by ~the ability of seed-caching nutcrackers to find their own caches, but not, 
generally, caches made by others, and (by) their searching at cache sites where seeds have 
been (experimentally) removed~ (VANDZR WALL, 1982:93). The evidence required to 
satisfy the fourth criterion is equivocal, but nutcrackers' use of visual cues in the 
environment during seed recovery suggests they may be attending to several variables 
simultaneously. 
This system of seed recovery by the nutcracker does not appear to be limited and 
stereotyped. In this particular case there are no apparent differences between extractive 
foraging by a bird and extractive foraging by a baboon when the criteria of Menzel and 
Wyers are applied to each. As BECK (1982) has pointed out, research on animal cognition 
tends to focus on the chimpanzee to the exclusion of other species. Taking BZCK'S 
argument one step further, one notes a tendency to assume that all primates possess 
superior intelligence in all areas of behavior, owing to their genetic, morphological and 
behavioral similarities to humans, when compared to other taxa. This is an assumption 
that must b e tested. 
Further, given that non primate species use extraction techniques in foraging, and 
that some of these techniques are sophisticated, it seems unlikely that extractive foraging 
ability was a significant factor in the evolution of primate intelligence. This statement 
should not be considered a definitive conclusion, because many untested assumptions and 
unexplored variabals regarding extractive foraging remain and deserve study. Rather, it 
can be formulated as a hypothesis for testing: No difference exists in extractive [oraging 
ability between primates and other animals. This hypothesis is falsifiable, and predictions 
can be devised to test it across taxa in both laboratory and field situations. If differences 
in extractive foraging across taxa are in fact found, they may or may not relate to the 
cognitive base of extractive foraging. 
Three variables are now discussed that might easily be developed into predictions for 
testing similarities and differences in extractive foraging behavior across taxa: olfactory 
cues, manual dexterity and strength. First, is it clear that no olfactory cues are received by 
foragers from embedded foods? Are primates any more or less sensitive to olfactory cues 
from food than are other animals? In this paper heavy emphasis is placed on MENZEL & 


PDF PAGE 7
EXTRACTIVE FORAGING AND PRIMATE INTELLIGENCE 367 
WYER'S (1981) first criterion for assessing cognition in foraging, which states that the 
forager must be able to take into account stimuli that are temporarily absent. An untested 
assumption here is that if no visual cues are available to a forager regarding location of an 
embedded food, then no other kinds of cues are available either. This assumption may be 
false. Some embedded foods may emit a smell detectable by foragers that reveals location 
of the food. 
Second, does degree of manual dexterity distinguish foraging of primates from that 
of other animals? Manual dexterity, which evolved after nails replaced claws in mammali- 
an evolution, is a hallmark of the primate order (WELLES, 1975) and often includes the 
ability to manipulate individual digits separately. This dexterity formed the basis of an 
adaptive radiation in primate evolution, allowing new niches to be filled and new food 
sources to be tapped (CAMPBELL, 1982). Does extractive foraging with the hands allow a 
more varied array of ,~hiddem~ foods to be eaten than does extractive foraging with the lips 
and teeth, muzzle, or other body parts? 
Of course, manual dexterity differs across species within an order as well as across 
taxa. Prosimians, for example, generally show less manipulative ability of the hand than 
do anthropoids (BISHOP, 1962; HLADIK, 1979). Among anthropoids, howler monkeys 
(Alouatta spp.) have relatively poor manual dexterity, whereas gelada baboons (Theropithe- 
cus gelada) have extreme dexterity and the highest index of thumb opposability among 
nonhuman primates (DUNBAR, 1983). Does manual dexterity and extractive foraging 
correlate among primates? Experiments can be devised to collect data on this question, 
and at least one has already been done. MILTON (1984) presented commercial walnuts in 
the shell to six species of primates in captivity. Reaction to the walnuts varied widely 
across species; some primates ate the nut immediately whereas others ignored it. Variable 
cracking techniques were used among those who ingested the nuts. MILTON (1984:274) 
concluded: 
Apparently animals lacking teeth suitable for crushing hard objects and/or lacking in manual dexterity to 
compensate for their relatively less powerful dentition or smaller gape do not perceive walnuts as food. 
Other species immediately recognize these same items as highly desirable and edible and can circumvent 
the problems involved at getting at the edible portion. I believe that none of these animals had ever seen a 
commercial walnut before these feeding experiments... These tests should be repeated with more animals 
and a greater variety of hard foods. 
Third, Milton's experiment raises the question of the role of strength in extractive 
foraging. Does the ability to extract and process foods vary with degree of strength in 
body musculature or dental morphology? If an animal is faced with an extractive foraging 
problem but fails to solve it, the reason may have nothing to do with intelligence, or even 
manual dexterity, but rather, strength. A likely example of such a case among primates is 
discussed by HARKISSON (1984:44) in his report of foraging by green monkeys (Cercopithe- 
cus sabaeus) in Senegal: ~Most fruits were easily obtained and processed: thick skins were 
eaten, but thicker shells were discarded... Some species of fruit had extremely hard shells 
and were inaccessible to the green monkeys, except when they found such fruits opened 
but discarded half eaten by baboons or chimpanzees~. 
Foraging and Intelligence: Is there a Relationship? 
This paper suggests that extractive foraging ability was not a significant factor in the 
evolution of primate intelligence because it is neither absent from nor qualitatively 
different among other taxa. If this suggestion is supported through the results of 
hypothesis testing, what does it mean for the relationship between foraging strategies and 


PDF PAGE 8
368 KING 
intelligence in primates that has been proposed elsewhere? Two main approaches exist for 
investigation of this question. First, following a <~primatocentrio~ approach, we can ask: 
Are there truly unique features of primate foraging that could account for primate 
intelligence? Second, following Milton's (1981) method of comparing species within the 
primate order, we can ask: Is there any order-wide correlation between intelligence and 
specific features of diet or foraging behavior? As CLUTToN-BRocK & HARVEY (1980) 
showed, frugivory is correlated with increased cranial capacity in primates. Before we can 
conclude that there really is something special about being a frugivore, we need to find a 
correlation between frugivory and some facet of intelligence that does not exist with other 
dietary regimes, for instance, insectivory. Or perhaps we should look beyond dietary 
composition to find out whether certain features of foraging (e.g. extreme dependence on 
patchily distributed fruit or embedded foods) correlate with intelligence within the 
primate order (or within other orders). 
The two major theories about the evolution of primate intelligence, one focusing on 
foraging and the other on complex social life, need not be treated as mutually exclusive. 
Speculation about the evolution of primate intelligence must be accompanied by compari- 
son of primates with nonprimates and by hypothesis testing related to both theories. 
Extractive Foraging and Hominoid Evolution 
The extraction techniques used by mammals in foraging evolved into the toolaided 
extractive foraging observed among cebus monkeys, chimpanzees, and humans. As is 
often emphasized (e.g. PARKER & GIBSON, 1979; WOLVOVF, 1982), expansions or modifi- 
cations of pre-existing behavior patterns are more likely to have resulted in hominization 
than would the appearance of evolutionarily novel behaviors. Since hominids are de- 
scribed as tool-using extractive foragers (TANNER, 1980; ZILHMAN, 1981), this paper 
concludes with a brief examination of foraging behavior, including extractive foraging, in 
hominoid evolution. 
About 15 million years ago, a diverse group of hominoids sharing thick-enameled 
dentition radiated out of a forest environment into a woodland habitat (ANDREWS, 1981; 
PILBEAM, 1979, 1980) where foods such as hard-shelled fruits and nuts were difficult to 
locate and process (KAY, 1981). Extractive foraging ability facilitated survival under such 
conditions and continued to be important into the Pliocene, when australopithecines 
occupied woodland-savannah and ate hard-shelled items (WALKER, 1981). The three types 
of food described by IsAAc (1980) as exploited exclusively or more intensively by human 
hunter-gatherers than by nonhuman primates are all in some way embedded foods that are 
hard to locate or process: hard-shelled nuts, large-package meat, and underground tubers. 
Other underground plants were also important: 
Belowground storage parts of water-edged plants and perennials of semiarid areas comprised a nutrient 
cache that was an integral part of the habitats of early hominids. The strategy of keying into a resource 
that was largely free from the effects of grazing, fire, and seasonal drought would assure a more reliable 
food source than that offered by above ground vegetation (Harley and Kappelman 1980:383). 
However, during hominization an important shift occurred not only in dietary 
composition compared to nonhuman primates but also in how food is collected and with 
whom it is shared. As LANCASTER & LANCASTER (1983) emphasized, nonhuman primates 
are individual foragers that do not share food regularly, although some scrounging may be 
tolerated. The hominid pattern of food-sharing, they noted, rests on the division of labor 
with a premium put on food exchange between the sexes, with each sex foraging at a 


PDF PAGE 9
EXTRACTIVE FORAGING AND PRIMATE INTELLIGENCE 369 
different level of the food chain. The Lancasters pointed out one enormously significant 
feature of human food-sharing and related it to the division of labor: ~Unlike the young of 
other mammals, human juveniles do not have to feed themselves once they are weaned. 
The division of labor takes on an added significance because its feeding insurance covers 
not only adults but also the much more vulnerable juvenile population>> (1983:36). They 
proposed that this protracted period of juvenile dependency began with early hominids. 
KURLAND & BECKERMAN (1985) argued similarly that the key to hominization rests with 
information exchange and reciprocity in foraging. 
The role of tools in hominid foraging is less clear than it is among wild cebus 
monkeys and chimpanzees that practice extractive techniques in foraging. The earliest 
stone tools may be those from Hadar, Ethiopia, dated to 2.5 million years ago. Often it is 
assumed, however, that australopithecines used organic tools similar to those employed by 
chimpanzees (TANNER, 1980; ZmHMAN, 1981). This assumption is consistent with evi- 
dence showing that Australopithecus a]arensis, the first known bipedal hominid (dated to 
about 3.5 million years ago), had a generalized hand allowing full manipulation (Johanson 
and Edey, 1981; JOHANSON & WHITE, 1979). 
There is a growing consensus that the usage or manufacture of stone tools alone was 
not responsible for the early phases of the hominization process (BECK, 1980; KURLAND & 
BECKERMAN, 1985; LOVEJOY, 1981; PILBEAM, 1980; RODMAN & MCHENRY, 1980; SI- 
MONS, 1977). A combined <~package>> of tool-aided extractive foraging, division of labor 
between the sexes, exchange of food, and feeding of juveniles characterizes early hominid 
foraging and sets it apart from foraging of other primates. Therefore, PILUEAM (1980) is 
correct in suggesting that it is time to look further at foraging behavior instead of cultural 
prime movers only (such as tools) in order to pinpoint selection pressures that have shaped 
the evolution of human behavior and intelligence. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS. -- For valuable comments on earlier versions of this paper I thank Sign 
Evans, Katharine Milton, Wayne McGnire, Ron Nadler, Patricia Schwagmeyer, and Janette Wallis. I am 
grateful to Jane Lancaster and Douglas Mock for stimulating discussion of ideas on foraging behavior. 
CIRMF, Franceville, Gabon, provided partial financial support during the writing of this manuscript. 
References 
ALEXANDER R.D. (1979). Darwinism and Human Affairs. Seattle: University of Washington Press: 
ALTMANN S.A. (in press). Foraging and Nutrition in Weanling Baboons: Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press. 
ALTMANN S.A. & ALTMANN J. (1970). Baboon Ecology: African Field Research. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press. 
ANDREWS P. (1981). Hominoid habitats o/ the Miocene. Nature, 289: 749. 
BECK, B.B. (1980). Animal Tool Behavior. New York: Garland Stpm Press. 
BECK B.B. (1982). Chimpocentrism: Bias in cognitive ethology. Journal of Human Evolution 11: 3-17. 
BISHOP A. (1962). Control of the hand in lower primates. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 
102: 316-337. 
BOESCH C. & BOESCH H. (1983). Optimisation of nut-cracking with natural hammers by wild chimpanzees. 
Behaviour, 83: 265-285. 
BOESCH C. & BOESCH H (1984). Mental map in wild chimpanzees: an analysis o[ hammer transports [or nut- 
cracking. Primates, 25: 160-170. 
BOURLmRE F., HtrNKELER C. & BERTRAND M. (1970). Ecology and behavior o[ Lowe's guenon (Cercopithe- 
cus campbelli lowei) in the Ivory Coast. In (J. R. Napier P. Ha. Napier, Eds) Old World Monkeys, 
pp. 299-350. Nez York: Academic Press. 


PDF PAGE 10
370 KING 
CAMPBELL B.G. (1982). Humankind Emerging. Boston: Little, Brown. 
CASrMIR M. J. (1975). Feeding ecology and nutrition of an eastern gorilla group in the Mt. Kahuzi region. Folia 
primatologica, 24: 81-136. 
CHARLES-DOMINIQUE P. & PETTER J. J. (1980). Ecology and social life of Phaner furcifer. In (P. Charles- 
Dominique et aL, Eds) Nocturnal Malagasy Primates: Ecology Physiology, and Behavior, pp. 75-96. 
New York: Academic Press. 
CLUTTON-BRocK T.H. & HARVEY P. (1980). Primates, brains and ecology. Journal of Zoology (London), 
190: 309-323. 
COWIE R.J., KREBS J. R. & SHERRY D. F. (1981). Food storing by marsh tits. Animal Behaviour, 29: 1252- 
1259. 
CROCKETT C.M. & WILSON W.L. (1980) The ecological separation of Macaca nemestrina and Macaca 
fascicularis in Sumatra. In (D. Lindburg, Ed) The Macaques, pp. 148-181. New York: Van Nostrand 
Reinhold. 
CROOK J. H. (1980). The Evolution of Human Consciousness. Oxford: Clarendon Press. 
CROOK J.H. & ALDRICH-BLAKE P. (1968). Ecological and behavioral contrasts between sympatric ground 
dwelling primates in Ethiopia. Folia primatologica, 8: 192-227. 
DUNBAR R.I.M. (1977). Feeding ecology of gelada baboons: a preliminary report. In (T.H. Clutton-Brock, 
Ed) Primate Ecology, pp. 251-273. London: Academic Press. 
DUNBAR R.I.M. (1983). Theropithecines and hominids: contrasting solutions to the same ecological problem. 
Journal of Human Evolution, 12: 647-658. 
EISENBERG J. F. & WILSON D. (1978). Relative brain size and feeding strategies in the Chiroptera. Evolution, 
32:740-751 
EWER R. F. (1968). Ethology of Mammals. New York: Plenum Press. 
GALDIKAS B.M.F. (1982). Orangutan tool use at Tanjung Puting Reserve, Central Indonesian Borneo 
(Kalimantan Tengah). Journal of Human Evolution, 11: 1%33. 
GOODALL J. (1964). Tool-using and aimed throwing in a community o/free-living chimpanzees. Nature, 201: 
1264-1266. 
HAMILTON W., BUSKIRK R. & BUSKIRK W. (1978). Environmental developmental determinants of object 
manipulation by chacma baboons in two southern African environments. Journal of Human Evolution, 
7: 205-216. 
HARRISSON M. (1984). Optimal foraging strategies in the diet of the green monkey, Cercopithecus sabaeus, at 
Mt. Assirik, Senegal International Journal of Primatology, 5: 435-471. 
HATLEY T. & KAPPELMAN S. (1980). Bears, pigs and Plio-Pleistocene hominids: a case for the exploitation of 
belowground food resources. Human Ecology 8: 371-387. 
HERNANDEZ-CAMACHO J. & COOPER R.W. (1976). The non-human primates of Colombia. In (R.W. 
Thorington Jr. and P. G. Hehne Eds) Neotropical Primates: Field Studies and Conservation, pp. 
35-69. Washington, D. C.: National Academy of Sciences. 
HILL W. C. O. (1966). Primates. Vol. VI Cercopithecoidea. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press. 
HLADIK C.M. (1979). Dietand ecology ofprosimians. In (G.A. Doyle and R. D. Martin, Eds) The Study of 
Prosimian Behavior, pp. 307-375. New York: Academic Press. 
HUMPHREY N.K. (1976). The social function of intellect. In (P.P.G. Bateson and R.A. Hinde, Eds) 
Growing Points in Ethology, pp. 303-317. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
ISAAC G. (1980). Casting the net wide: a review of archaeological evidence for early hominid land-use and 
ecological relations. In (L. Koniggson, Ed) Current Argument on Early Man. Oxford: Pergamon 
Press. 
JOHANSON D. C. & EBEY M. (1981). Lucy: The Beginnings of Humankind. New York: Simon and 
Schuster. 
JOHANSON D.C. & WHITE T. D. (1979). A systematic assessment of early African hominids. Science, 203: 
321-329. 
JOLLY A. (1966). Lemur social intelligence and primate intelligence. Science 153: 501-506. 
JOLLY A. (1985). The Evolution of Primate Behavior. 2nd ed. New York: Macmillan Publishing Company. 
KAY R.FI (1981). The nut-crackers: a nez theory of the adaptations of the Ramapithecinae. American Journal 
of Physical Anthropology, 55: 141-152. 
KINZEY W. G. (1977). Diet and feeding behaviour of Callicebus torquatus. In (T.H. Clutton-Brock, Ed) 
Primate Ecology, pp. 127-159. London: Academic Press. 
KUMMER H. (1968). Social Organization of Hamadryas Baboons. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
KUMMER H. (1982). Social knowledge in free-ranging primates. In (D. Griffin, Ed) Animal Mind-Human 


PDF PAGE 11
EXTRACTIVE FORAGING AND PRIMATE INTELLIGENCE 371 
Mind pp. 113-130. Berlin: Springer-Verlag. 
KURLAND J.A. & BECKERMAN SJ. (1985). Optimal foraging and hominid evolution: labor and reciprocity. 
American Anthropologist, 87: 73-93. 
LANCASTER J. B. & LANCASTER C.S. (1983). Parental investment: the hominid adaptation. In (D. Ortner, Ed) 
How Humans Adapt: A Biocultural Odyssey, pp. 33-56. Washington, D. C.: Smithsonian Institu- 
tion Press. 
LOVEJOY C.O. (1981). The origin o] man. Science 211: 341-350. 
MACE G. H., HARVEY P. H. & CLUTTON-BRocK T. H. (1981). Brain size and ecology in small mammals. 
Journal of Zoology (London) 193: 333-354. 
McGREw W.C. (1979a). Evolutionary implications of sex differences in chimpanzee predation and tool use. In 
(D.A. Hamburg and E. R. McCown, Eds) The Great Apes, pp. 440-463. Menlo Park, California: 
Benjamin Cummings Publishing Company. 
MCGREw W.C. (1979b). Habitat and the adaptiveness of primate intelligence (reply to Parker and Gibson). 
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 2: 393. 
McGREw W.C. & ROGERS M. R. (1983). Chimpanzees, tools, and termites: new record from Gabon. 
American Journal of Primatology 5 (2): 171-174. 
MCGREW W.C., TUTIN C.E.G. & BALDWIN P. (1979). Chimpanzees, tools, and termites: cross-cultural 
comparisons of Senegal, Tanzania and Rio Muni. Man (n.s.) 14: 185-214. 
McGREw W.C. (1981). Social and cognitive capabilities o/nonhuman primates: lessons from the wild to 
captivity. International Journal for the Study of Animal Problems 2: 138-149. 
MENZEL E.W. & WYERS E.J. (1981). Cognitive aspects of foraging behavior. In (A.C. Kamil and T. D. 
Sargent, Eds) Foraging Behavior. New York: Garland STPM Press. 
MILTON K. (1981). Distribution patterns o/tropicalplant ]oods as an evolutionary stimulus to primate mental 
development. American Anthropologist, 83: 534-548. 
MILTON K. (1984). The role of food-processing factors in primate food choice. In (P. S. Rodman andJ. G. H. 
Cant, Eds) Adaptations for Foraging in Nonhuman Primates, pp. 249-279. New York: Columbia 
University Press. 
NISHIDA T. & HIRAIWA M. (1982). Natural history o/tool-using behavior by wild chimpanzees in feeding upon 
wood-boring ants. Journal of Human Evolution, 7: 597-608. 
PARKER S.T. & GIBSON K.R. (1977). Object manipulation, tool use and sensorimotor intelligence as feeding 
adaptations in cebus monkeys and great apes. Journal of Human Evolution 6: 623-641. 
PARKER S.T. & GIBSON K.R. (1979). A developmental model for the evolution o/language an d intelligence in 
early hominids. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 2: 367-408. 
PILBEAM D, (1979). Recent finds and interpretations of Miocene hominoids. Annual Review of Anthropolo- 
gy, 8: 333-352. 
PILBEAM D, (1980). Major trends in human evolution. In (L. Koniggson. Ed) Current Argument on Early 
Man, pp. 261-285. Oxford: Pergamon Press. 
PIRLOT P. & POTTIER J. (1977). Encephalization and quantitative brain composition in bats in relation to their 
life-habits. Review of Canadian Biology, 36: 321-336. 
RHINE R.J. & WESTLUND B.J. (1978L The nature of a primary feeding habit in different age-sex classes of 
yellow baboons (Papio cynocephalus). Folia primatologica, 30: 64-79. 
RICHARD A. F. (1985). Primates in Nature. New York: Freeman and Company. 
RIJKSEN H.D. (1978). A Field Study on Sumatran Orangutans (Pongo pygmaeus abelii). Wageningen: H. 
Veenman and Zonen B.V. 
RII, LEY S. (1970). The social organization o] foraging in gray langurs (Presbytis entellus thersites). In (J.R. 
Napier and P. H. Napier, Eds) Old World Monkeys, pp. 481-509. New York: Academic Press. 
RODMAN P.S. & McHENRY H. M. (1980). Bioenergetics and the origin of hominid bipedalism. American 
Journal of Physical Anthropology,52: 103-106. 
SHERRY D.F., KREBS J. R. & COWIE R. J. (1981). Memory for the location of stored food in marsh tits. 
Animal Behaviour, 29: 1260-1266. 
SHERRY D. F. (1984). Food storage by black-capped chickadees: memory/or the location and contents of 
caches. Animal Behaviour, 32: 451-464. 
SL~ONS E.L. (1977). Diversity among hominids: a vertebrate paleontologist's viewpoint. In (C. Jolly, Ed) 
Early Hominids of Africa, pp. 543-566. New York: St. Martin's Press. 
STRUHSAKER T.T. (1978). Food habits of five monkey species in the kibale Forest, Uganda. In (D.J. Chivers 
and J. Herbert, Eds) Recent Advances in Primatology, pp. 225-248. New York: Academic Press. 
STRUNHSAKER T.T. & HUNKELER P. (1971). Evidence of tool-using by chimpanzees on the Ivory Coast: Folia 


PDF PAGE 12
372 KING 
primatologica 15: 212-219. 
SUGIYAMA Y. & KOMAN J. (1977). Tool-using and -making behavior in wild chimpanzees at Bossou, Guinea. 
Primates, 20: 513-524. 
SUSSMAN R.W. & ICaNZEY W. G. (1984). The ecological role o/the Callitrichidae: a review. American 
Journal of Physical Anthropology. 64: 419-449. 
SUSSMAN R.W. & TATTERSALL I (1981). Behavior and ecology o~ Macaca [ascicularis in Mauritius: a 
preliminary study. Primates, 22: 192-205. 
TANNER N.M. (1980). On Becoming Human. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
TERBORGH J. (1983). Five New World Primates: A Stydy in Comparative Ecology. Princeton: Princeton 
University Press. 
UEHARA S. (1982). Seasonal changes in the techniques employed by wild chimpanzees in the Mahale 
Mountains, Tanzania, to /eed on termites (P. spiniger). Folia primatologica, 37: 44-76. 
VANDER WALL S.B. (1982). An experimental analysis o[ cache recovery in Clark's nutcracker. Animal 
Behaviour, 30: 84-94. 
WALKER A. (1981). Diet and teeth: dietary hypotheses and human evolution. Philosophical Transactions of 
the Royal Society of London, B 292: 57-64. 
WASER P. (1977). Feeding, ranging and group size in the mangabey Cercocebus albigena. In (T.H. Clutton- 
Brock, Ed) Primate Ecology, pp. 183-222. New York: Academic Press. 
WELLES J. F. (1975). The anthropoid hand: a comparative study o] prehension. In Contemporary Primatolo- 
gy, pp. 30-33, 5th International Congress of Primatology. Basel: Karger. 
WOLPOFF M. (1982). Ramapit'hecus and hominid origins. Current Anthropology, 23: 5012-522. 
ZILHMAN A.L. (1981). Women as shapers o[ the human adaptation. In (F. Dhlberg, Ed) Woman the 
Gatherer, pp. 75-120. New Haven: Yale University Press. 
Received June 1985; Accepted March 1986. 
