PDF PAGE 1
Sue Taylor Parker 
Department of Anthropology, 
Sonoma State College, 
Rohnert Park, 
California, U.S.A. 
Kathleen R. Gibson 
Department of Neurobiology 
and Anatomy, 
Health Science Center 
Medical School, 
The University of Texas, 
Houston, Texas, U.S.A. 
Received 27 September 1976 and 
accepted 30 December 1976 
Object Manipulation, Tool Use. and 
Sensorimotor Intelligence as Feeding 
Adaptations in~ Cebus Monkeys and 
Great Apes 
In this paper we propose a typology for classifying object manipula- 
tion and tool use. We then classify tool use as context specific or 
intelligent tool use on the basis of criteria drawn from Piaget's 
Sensorimotor Intelligence Series in human infants. In an extension 
of Hamilton's hypothesis we argue that intelligent tool use and 
tertiary sensorimotor intelligence in cebus monkeys and great apes is an 
adaptation for feeding on a variety of seasonally limited embedded 
food sources, while context specific too1. use is an adaptation for 
t~edlng on one class of embedded food sources..We also argue tha~ 
the evolution of specific object manipulatio n . schemata must be 
considered separately from the evolution of intelligence. 
1. Introduction 
Inquiry into the evolution of tool-using abilities in animal species has been hampered 
by the absence of an appropriate theoretical framework for comparative analysis. There 
is no agreed upon definition of tool use; different investigators classify strikingly different 
types of object manipulation--including those involving no tool as tool use. There is no 
agreed upon distinction between intelligent and unintelligent tool use; some investigators 
believe that there is no relationship between tool use and intelligence. The adaptive 
significance of tool use in primate species at least is poorly understood. 
In this article we propose a typology for defining and classifying various types of 
object manipulation and tool use; we distinguish between intelligent and unintelligent 
tool use on the basis of criteria drawn from Jean Piaget's model of Sensorimotor Intelli- 
gence in human infants; and we propose an extension of Hamilton's hypothesis (1974) 
to explain the adaptive significance of intelligent tool use and tertiary sensorimotor intelli- 
gence in great apes and cebus monkeys. 
Although our typology applies to all animal species, we focus primarily o n great 
apes and cebus monkeys because they are the only animals known to consistently display 
intelligent tool use characteristic of advanced stages of the Sensorimotor Intelligence 
Series in human infants. 
2. Object Manipulation and Tool Use 
We believe that many confusions concerning tool use in animal species can be avoided 
by distinguishing the following categories of object manipulation which can be directly 
related to tool use. 
(1) Simple prehension--grasping an object in one or both hands (or in other anatomical 
equipment such as mouth and/or claws, trunk, etc.). 
Journal of Human Evolution (1977) 6, 623-641 


PDF PAGE 2
624 S.T. PARKER AND K. R. GIBSON 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
Simple object manipulation---coordinated manipulation of one object with one or 
two manipulators, or sequential manipulation of two objects with one or two mani- 
pulators, e.g. object transferring from hand to hand, object rotation, object 
uncovering followed by grasping. 
Object-substrate manipulation--manipu;ation of one object (with one or two mani- 
pulators) relative to a fixed substrate or medium, e.g. rubbing an object on the 
ground, or washing an object in water, or banging an object on a surface, or 
throwing an object onto a surface. 
Complex object manipulation manipulation of one detached object relative to 
another (and in some cases through a force field) involving subsequent change 
of state of one or both of the objects, e.g. hitting one object with another, either 
directly or by throwing, raking in one object with another, opening one object 
with another as a lever. 
Social-object manipulation manipulation of an object relative to other animals 
without direct physical contact between the object and other animals, e.g. baiting 
another animal with food, agonistic displays with objects, resulting in changed 
behavior in the receiver. 
Social-object manipulation can involve simple prehension, simple object manipulation, object- 
substrate manipulation or even complex object manipulation. 
These categories potentially apply to all taxa. They imply nothing about the stereo- 
typy or flexibility of the organization of the actions, they simply define the locus and 
results of the actions. These categories help clarify the definition of tool use. 
Tool use is a goal directed form of complex object manipulation involving manipulation of 
an object (the tool), not part of the actor's anatomical equipment and not attached to a 
Table I 
Categories of 
tool use 
Categories of object manipulation 
-- A- • "-~ 
Simple object Object-substrate Complex object 
manipulation manipulation manipulation 
Proto tool use Herring gulls 
Wild Cebus 
Baboons 
Macaques 
True tool use Great apes 
Captive Cebus 
Baboons* 
Macaques* 
Sea otters 
Vultures 
Buzzards 
Galapagos finches 
* Occasionally. 


PDF PAGE 3
FEEDING ADAPTATIONS 625 
substrate, to change the position, action, or condition of another object, either directly 
through the action of the tool on the object or of the object on the tool, or through 
action at a distance as in aimed throwing (van Lawick-Goodall, 1970; Alcock, 1972; 
Beck, 1975; Piaget, 1954). In other words, it involves use of a tool to transform an 
object. This definition includes aimed throwing of a tool to hit an object, but excludes 
aimed dropping of an object on a substrate to open it. 
Aimed throwing of an object on a substrate in order to open the object, and banging 
an object on a substrate to open it and other actions involving transformations of an 
object through object-substrate manipulation, we call proto tool use. The aimed dropping 
of mollusks against a sea wall by Herring gulls (Beck, 1976), and banging of nuts on 
hard surfaces by cebus monkeys, and sweet potato-washing and snowball making by 
Japanese macaques (Eaton, 1976) are all examples ofproto tool use. (See Table 1). The 
key difference between true tool use and proto tool use seems to lie in the detachment 
andmanipulation of both the object of change and the agent of change (the tool) in 
tool use, and the detachment and manipulation of the object of change alone in proto 
tool use. 
We also distinguish a third category of tool use involving goal directed social-object 
manipulation in order to change the behaviour of other animals, e.g. agonistic object 
manipulation in order to intimidate other animals, carrying infants as agonistic buffers 
in approaching a dominant animal , baiting another animal with food. We call this 
class of goal directed objectmanipulati0n, social tool use. 
Social tool Use, like other forms of tool use, can be intelligent or context-specific. 
Many non-human primates display context-specific tool use in agonistic displays, but 
there are only a few examples of apparently intelligent social tool use. Except for these 
cases we will not be concerned with social tool use in this paper. 
3. Object Manipulation .and Tool Use in Relation 
to Intelligence 
The preceding categories oi~ object manipulation and tool use can be classified as inteUi- 
gent or uningelligent with reference to certain diagnostic criteria derived from Jean 
Piaget's stages of intellectual de~/elopment in human infants. 
Piaget's model of human infant intellectual development is uniquely suited for com- 
parative analysis of tool use and object manipulation in primates and other animal 
species because it focuses on the organization of underlying behaviour patterns, that is, 
on their locus of applications, their temporal and spatia! patterning, their coordinations, 
their goals, their elicitors, their reinforcers, etc., rather than focusing on specific motor 
patterns. 
Because Piaget's model emphasizes the developmental continuity between infant 
sensorimotor behavior and subsequent symbolizing and mental operations in later 
childhood, it provides a continuous graduated scale ofstages againstwhich to compare 
infant development and adult achievements in other species. 
Although Piaget's model of sensorimotor development is suitable for comprehensive 
comparative studies of behavioral development in primate species (Parker, 1973, 1976, 
1977; Jolly, 1972) in this article we are concerned only with the very specific issue of the 


PDF PAGE 4
626 s.T. PARKER AND K. R. GIBSON 
application of Piaget's model to tile comparative study of object manipulation and, tool 
use in relation to intelligence.* 
Piaget has developed a model of-human intellectual development from birth through 
adolescence spanning four periods: the Sensorimotor Period from birth to two years, the 
Preconceptual Period from two to six or seven years (which is divided into two sub- 
periods, the Symbolic and Preconceptual Thought Subperiod and the Intuitive Thought 
Subperiod), the Concrete Operati6ns Period from six to seven to 11 or I2 years; and the 
Formal Operations Period from 11 or 12 years on. 
During the Sensorimotor Period, human infants proceed through six consecutive stages 
of intellectual development, beginning with simple neonatal reflexes and ending with the 
achievement of insightful search for new means through internalized trial and error 
variation, differentiation, and recombination of schemata. The last four of these six 
stages involve increasingly complex object manipulation strategies, as follows. 
Stage 3. "The Secondary Circular Reactions--Procedures Destined to Make Interesting 
Sights Last" (Piaget, 1952), which occurs from the 4th to 8th month, is characterized 
by voluntary differentiation of schemata and coordination of vision and prehension on 
objects, and by the repetition of actions on an object to recreate an "interesting spectacle", 
as for example in repeatedly shaking a rattle or batting a mobile, or banging an object 
on a surface. 
Stage 4. "Coordination of Secondary Schemata and Their Application to New Situation" 
(Piaget, 1952), which occurs from the 8th month on, is characterized by voluntary 
sequential and simultaneous coordinations of schemata, as for example in hand to hand 
transferring objects, object rotation and pulling apart, and by sequential manipulation of 
two objects, as in uncovering an object in order to grasp it. It is also characterized by 
the incipient distinction between means and ends, and by the application of existing 
schemata to new situations. 
Stage 5. "The Tertiary Circular Reactions and The Discovery of New Means Through 
Active Experimentation" (Piaget, 1952), which occurs at twelve months, is characterized 
by purposeful trial and error variation, differentiation and recombination of schemata in 
experimenting to find new means to old ends and new ends; schemata are intentionally 
accommodated to the special properties of tile objects or situations during this stage. In 
the area of object manipulation this involves manipulation of one object relative to 
another and/or relative to force/fields such as gravity or inertia, in order to explore 
causality or to solve a problem, e.g. repeatedly dropping objects from different heights 
* Piaget's model also provides an important framework for com- 
paring observational learning and imitation in primates; it correlates 
different degrees and types of imitative ability with different stages 
of sensorimotor intellectual development. The capacity to imitate 
actions already present in the infant's repertoire is characteristic of 
the fourth stage of the Imitation Series (which runs parallel in time 
with the Sensorimotor Intelligence Series); the capacity to imitate 
novel actions which are not already present in the infant's repertoire 
is characteristic of the fifth stage of the Imitation Series and is 
dependent upon the "tertiary circular reactions" of the fifth stage 
in the parallel Sensorimotor Series. Piaget clearly indicates that 
imitation is dependent on intelligence and not an independent 
capacity of lesser significance (Piaget 1952, 1962). This observation 
has important implications concerning the social transmission of 
new behaviors in primate troops (Parker 1976a). 


PDF PAGE 5
FEEDING ADAPTATIONS 627 
Table 2 
LIII 
Categories of 
of sensorimotor 
organization 
U 
Simple object 
manipulation 
Categories of object manipulation 
.i i.~ . i , 
Object-substrate Complex object 
manipulation manipulation 
Social-object 
manipulation 
Context specific 
sensorimotor 
organization 
Herring Vultures 
Gulls Buzzards 
Galapagos F. 
Sea otters 
Baboons 
Macaques 
Secondary lineal' 
sensorimotor 
intelligence 
Macaques 
Baboons 
Macaques 
Baboons 
Macaques 
Tertiary circular 
sensorimotor 
intelligence 
Cebus Captive Gebus Captive Gebus* 
monkeys Great apes 
Baboons* Chimpanzees* 
Macaques* 
* Occasionally. 
in order to understand gravity, placing objects inside other objects and removing them 
to understand spatial relations among objects, using a stick to rake in out of reach objects. 
Stage 6. "The Invention of New Means Through Mental Combinations" (Piaget, 1952), 
which occurs from twelve to eighteen months on, is characterized by insightful problem- 
solving and imitation involving internalized trial and error, ariation, differentiation and 
recombination of schemata, e.g. immediate insightful use of a stick to take in an out 
of reach object, or deferred imitation of an absent model's behavior. 
According to Piaget the fifth stage of the Sensorimotor Intelligence Series of the Sen- 
sorimotor Period represents the emergence of true intelligence; we characterize this 
type or level of intelligence as tertiary sensorimotor intelligence. 
Although four of the five categories of object manipulation presented above correspond 
in some respects to object manipulations characteristic of the third through the fifth 
stages of the Sensorimotor Intelligence Series in human infants (simple prehension) is 
characteristic of stage 3; simple ot)ject manipulation is characteristic of stage 4; object-substrate 
manipulation is characteristic of stages 3 or 4 depending on its application, complex object 
manipulation is characteristic of stage 5) ; they alone are not diagnostic of these stages. It 
would be misleading, for example, to classify an isolated case of complex object manipulation 
as a "tertiary circular reaction" because the "tertiary circular reactions" are a class of 
such actions discovered through trial and error variation, differentiation, and recombina- 
tion of elements in groping to discover the properties of objects or the solution to problems. 
It is precisely to avoid this confusion that we have distinguished object manipulation 
categories independent of their epigenitic or ontogeneic origin. Our object manipulation 
categories potentially apply to the behavior ofany species, Piaget's Sensorimotor Stages do 
not directly apply, and partial analogies are more misleading than iliuminating. 
After classifying a species behavior in terms of the simpler category system and 
determining the number of schemata in each category, we can go on to examine the 
processes involved in the production of these behaviors. A full understanding of the 
production of these behaviors requires longitudinal developmental studies (Parker, 


PDF PAGE 6
628 S. T. PARKER AND K. R. GIBSON 
1977) because this methodology alone will reveal whether the patterns develop through 
context specific or variable play. 
Tertiary sensorimotor intelligence, diagnostic of the fifth and sixth stages, is characterized 
by trial and error application involving variation, differentiation, and recombination 
of actions in directed groping to discover the special properties of objects or to solve 
problems through new means. It involves the exploration and manipulation of causality 
through accommodation to the special properties of objects. This process necessarily 
involves trial and error application of several schemata to various goals or enlzls. Deter- 
mining whether or not these processes occur requires longitudinal developmental studies. 
The fact that tertiary sensorimotor intelligence and intelligent tool use characteristic of 
tertiary sensorimotor intelligence involves invention implies that while the capacity for in- 
telligent tool use is species specific, particular tool using applications and contexts and 
schemata are invented and transmitted through observational learning and/or imitation 
and are therefore likely to vary from individual to individual or from group to group 
within a species. 
Secondary linear sensorimotor intelligence, diagnostic of the forth stage, is characterized 
by application of familiar schemata in new situations, these schemata may include 
simple object manipulation schemata and object-substrate manipulation schemata. Therefore 
proto tool use involving object-substrate manipulation is diagnostic of secondary linear sensorimotor 
intelligence when it is applied in new situations. In this case proto tool use is also likely 
to vary from individual to individual or group to group. 
Context specific tool use by contrast is characterized by application of one object mani- 
pulation schema (specifically a complex object manipulation schema) to one specific situ- 
ation even though it may entail trial and error variation in tile application of the schema, 
i.e. in the intensity or direction of the actions, or in the size and shape of the objects 
utilized. This implies that context specific tool use schemata, applications, and contexts 
are population or species specific and unlikely to vary from individual to individual or 
group to group. In some cases closely related populations or species may display function- 
ally equivalent tool using and morphological adaptations, as for example, tool use in 
southern sea otters as compared to teeth use in northern sea otters to open mollusks 
(Hall & Schaller, 1964). 
Context specific tool use involves trial and error application of one complex object manipu- 
lation schema (such as aimed dropping of one object--the tool--on another object) in one 
specific context, such as opening shell fish; intelligent tool use involves trial and error 
application of several complex object manipulation schemata such as aimed throwing, 
using a lever, banging with a tool, raking in with a stick, probing with a stick, in different 
contexts, such as opening objects, raking in out-of-reach objects, extracting objects from 
a container without opening it, using a variety of objects such as sticks, rocks, leaves. 
Intelligent tool use involves accommodation to the specific situation and exploring 
and manipulating physical causality in a generalized manner. 
Comparative studies of tool use in animals species should focus on the number of 
complex object manipulation schemata, the number of objects used, the number of contexts 
in which they are displayed and on the ontogeny of the patterns. Only longitudinal 
developmental studies can reveal whether schemata develop through invention and 
imitation or trial and error shaping in a narrow context. It seems likely that there is a 
continuum along these four dimensions and that context specific and intelligent tool use 
represent the extreme ends of the spectrum in all dimensions. Galapagos finches and 


PDF PAGE 7
FEEDINO ADAPTATIONS 629 
vultures and buzzards apparently fall at one end o fthis continuum in displaying relatively 
stereotyped species specific context specific tool use, and cebus monkeys and great apes 
fall at the other end of the spectrum displaying intelligent tool use. Presumably other 
species fall in between the two extremes on all of these four dimensions of behavioral 
organization. Extensive field work will be necessary to classify animal species along these 
dimensions. In this paper we are concerned solely with the issue of what sorts of selection 
pressures favored the evolution of the two extreme forms of tool use. 
Hamilton (1974) suggests that tool use in general (he does not distinguish between 
context specific and intelligent tool use) correlates with extractive foraging (which he 
calls "scavenge hunting") and an omnivorous diet. We propose that intelligent tool use 
correlates with extractive foraging on seasonally limited embedded foods and an omni- 
vorous diet, while context specific tool use correlates with extractive foraging on non- 
seasonal embedded foods and a narrow non-omnivorous diet. It seems likely that seasonal 
avadability of high protein foods favors generalized exploration and application and 
accommodation of preexisting complex object manipulation schemata that is, intelligence, in 
highly omnivorous mammalian species. A wide species range with locally variable food 
sources also favors this generalized exploration and application of complex object mani- 
pulation schemata (see Tables 3 and 4). 
Tool use in general seems to correlate with atypical feeding habits of a species within 
a phyletic group (Alcock, 1972, 1975); being atypical of their groups morphologically, 
they lack anatomical specializations for exploiting embedded food sources and hence 
resort to tunctionally equivalent behavior, tool use, which yields more calories for 
energy expended than other forms of foraging and feeding (Alcock, 1975). Alcock 
suggests that tool-using species were late comers who were forced into tool use through 
competition with other species. MacArthur (1972) notes that populations of one species 
foraging in unproductive habitats tend to have a broader diet than other populations 
of the same species foraging in productive habitats. Therefore we would expect to see 
more complex object manipulation applied to a wider range of food sources among chim- 
panzees and cebus monkey populations living in unproductive habitats with highly 
seasonally food sources, and we suggest that tertiary sensorimotor intelligence was selected 
under these conditions. 
Table 3 
Foraging and 
feeding patterns 
Categories of tool use 
.... JL .... 
Context specific Context specific Intelligent proto Intelligent 
proto tool use tool use tool use tool use 
Specialized extractive 
foraging and feeding 
on one class of non- 
seasonal foods 
Omnivorous extractive 
foraging and feeding 
on seasonal foods 
Herring gulls Galapagos 
Sea otters Finches 
Buzzards 
Vultures 
Cebus monkeys 
Chimpanzees 
Macaques 
Baboons 
Cebus 
Chimps 


PDF PAGE 8
630 s.T. PARKER AND K. R. GIBSON 
Table 4 Correlates of two forms of tool use 
Context specific tool use Intelligent tool use 
Diet 1. Narrow specialized 
diet 
2. Non-seasonal 
embedded foods 
3. Uniform embedded 
foods across species 
range 
Behavioral 4. Population or species 
variation invariant tool use 
Ontogeny 5. Shaping through 
reintbrcement in 
narrow context 
I. Broad omnivorous 
diet 
2. Seasonal embedded 
foods 
3. Locally variable 
embedded foods 
across species range 
4. Individual and/or 
group variation in 
tool use 
5. Generalized trial and 
error exploration with 
accommodation to 
specific conditions 
4. Object Manipulation in Cebus Monkeys and 
Great Apes 
Reports by many investigators indicate that captive cebus monkeys display many 
complex object manipulation schemata in an intelligent way. Kltiver, for example, found 
that Cebus could solve many different versions of tile object-out-of-reach problem using 
a wide variety of tools including rakes, sacks, rings, bones, boxes and live rats. Some 
versio,_'s of this problem required the sequential use of as many as four tools (Warden, 
Koch & Field (1940) reported the sequential use of as many as seven tools). Many 
versions of this problem were solved by insight on the first attempt after visual inspection 
alone, others required trial and error experimentation for their solution (Kliiver, 1933, 
Table 5 
Piaget's sensorimotor intelligence series 
stages in human infants 
U 
Species comparisons 
Chimpanzees 
Macaques* and gorillas 
Cebus 
monkeys 
Stage 1-Reflex Stage 
Stage 2-"Primary Circular Reactions" and the 
"First Acquired Adaptations" 
Stage 3-"Secondary Circular Reactions" 
Stage 4-"Coordination of Secondary Schemata and 
Their Application to New Situations 
Stage 5-"The Tertiary Circular Reactions" and 
"Discovery of New Means Through Active 
Experimentation" 
Stage 6-"The Invention of New Means Through 
Mental Combinations" 
yes yes yes? 
yes yes yes ? 
no yes yes 
yes yes yes 
no yes yes 
no yes yes 
* A stumptail macaque infant displayed an analogous series of 
sensorimotor period stages involving the elaboration of secondary 
linear schemata and body schemata (Parker, 1973, 1977). 


PDF PAGE 9
FEEDINO ADAPTATIONS 631 
1937). Bierens de Haan (1930) reported similar results. Romanes quotes his sister's 
description of a cebus monkey using a spoon as a lever to pry open the lid of a box, 
using a hammer to open a nut, using a key to open a lock by trial and error, repeatedly 
screwing and unscrewing a brush handle and spinning round objects, and lighting paper 
strips in the fire after rolling them up. He claims to have verified all her observations 
many times (Romanes, 1882). Ververs & Weiner (1960) also reported (and filmed) a 
cebus monkey using a hammer to open a nut. Both Kltiver (1933) and Rensch (1973) 
reported picture painting in captive cebus monkeys. These descriptions reveal intelligent 
complex object manipulation schemata characteristic of the method of the "tertiary circular 
reactions" in human infants. A capacity for symbolization is also sue jested by Carpenter 
& Locke's report of trading tokens for food (Carpenter & Locke, 1~3 l). 
Our observations of adult cebus monkeys at the San Francisco Zoo, the San Diego 
Wild Animal Park, and the Gladys Porter Zoo in Brownsville, Texas revealed "secondary 
circular reactions" such as repeatedly shaking rattles and hitting swinging objects, and 
many other behavioral routines involving the method of the "tertiary circular reactions" 
in human infants, for example, placing objects inside objects and removing them, placing 
objects on top of other objects, wrapping objects in cloths, using sticks to rake in out of 
reach objects and repeatedly rolling balls and other objects (Gibson & Parker, 1976)* 
(see Table 5). 
Field reports indicate that wild cebus monkeys also exhibit considerable simple object 
manipulation in extractive foraging, including unrolling leaves to get insects, breaking open 
twigs and branches to get insects, and proto tool use including banging nuts and hard 
shelled fruits on surfaces to open them. (Thorington, 1967; Oppenheimer, 1968; Klein, 
1972; Freese, 1975). 
Reports of true tool use in wild Cebus are rare: Kaufman (1962) describes cebus 
monkeys dropping objects on coatis in an aggressive enc6umer; Kortland & Kooij 
(1963) cite a second hand report of a Gebus aiming and throwing a stick at a rattlesnake; 
Hernandez-Camacho & Cooper (1976) cite reports of cebus monkeys on Gorgonia 
Island opening oysters with rocks. 
The paucity of data on complex object manipulation in wild cebus monkeys is not sur- 
prising given the relatively few hours devoted to their study. Chimpanzees had been 
studied in several habitats by several investigators before termite fishing was discovered. 
It is not unlikely that Cebus display tool use seasonally in conjunction with foraging for 
particular high protein foods, and/or that it occurs only in certain habitats, or perhaps 
only in certain species. 
According to Hamilton (1973) tool use occurs in "scavenge hunting" (searching for 
and seizing small relatively immobile prey) which is correlated with an omnivorous diet 
and extensive foraging activity. According to our modification of Hamilton's hypothesis, 
intelligent tool use only is correlated with an omnivorous diet. Cebus monkeys seem 
* It seems likely that Gebus intellectual abilities are based on superior 
neurological capacities: the neocortical progression index of Gebus 
is 55, which is comparable to an index of 60 in chimpanzees, and is 
considerably above the indices of sympatric neotropical primates 
such as howlers (20) and squirrel monkeys (40), and is even above 
that of macaques (45) (Stephen, 1972). [The neocortical progression 
index normalizes for the allometric relation between brain size and 
body size with reference to the brain]body ratio of basal insectivores 
(Stephen, 1972).] 


PDF PAGE 10
632 s.T. PARKER AND K. R. GIBSON 
to fit this pattern. They are omnivores with an extremely catholic diet, including nuts, 
buds, flowers, leaves, shoots, stems, and pith of many plants (more than fifty plant 
species on Barro Colorado Island, for example), and a significant amount of animal 
matter, including ants, wasps, spiders, insect larvae, eggs, and small vertebrates in- 
cluding baby squirrels, fledgling birds, fi'ogs, and lizards (Thorington, 1967; Hladik & 
Hladik, 1969; Chapman, 1929, 1938; Klein, 1972; Klein & Klein, 1975; Baldwin & 
Baldwin, 1972; Oppenheimer, 1968). Many of these food sources are highly seasonal 
(Hladik & Hladik, 1969). 
Several investigators have emphasized the striking differences between the feeding 
behaviour of Cebus and sympatric primate species. In a Colombian rainforest, for example, 
cebus monkeys and squirrel monkeys spent most of their time foraging, this is, moving 
along eating and searching for food, especially insects (cebus monkeys spent more time 
foraging in a given place and ate more cryptic insects rolled in leaves and encased in 
branches than did squirrel monkeys), while the primarily vegetarian spider and howler 
monkeys spent most of their time in stationary feeding and progression (Klein, 1972; 
Klein & Klein, 1975). On Barro Colorado Island a similar distinction between the 
feeding strategies of cebus and spider and howler monkeys was observed (Hladik & 
Hladik, 1969). Thorington (1967, 1970) also noted the greater concentration span and 
object manipulation of cebus monkeys as compared to squirrel monkeys, and related 
it to their feeding strategies. 
Reports by many investigators indicate that captive chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes) 
display many intelligent complex object manipulation schemata reflecting the method of 
the "tertiary circular reaction". Kbhler (1927), for example, found that chimpanzees 
could solve many versions of the object-out-of-reach problem using a wide variety of tools, 
including sticks and boxes, through trial and error and insight problem-solving. Menzel 
(1972) reported spontaneous invention of ladders as tools in captive chimpanzees; Rensch 
(1973) reported picture painting by captive chimpanzees; others have reported use of 
keys to open locks (Hahn, 1971; Parker, personal observation). Captive chimpanzees 
have been reported to manufacture tools by modifying sticks and fitting one stick 
into another (Kbhler, 1927; Schiller, 1949). Captive chimpanzees also display the 
capacity for symbol man;_pulation as displayed in American Sign Language (Gardner 
& Gardner, 1971 ; Fouts, 1973) and other artificial "languages" (Permack, 1971)perhaps 
indicating symbolic and preconceptual intelligence. 
Wild chimpanzees display tool use in termite fishing and anting with probes, in 
pounding open hard shelled fruit with stones, in sponging up water from tree bowls and 
fluids from the brain cases of prey animals with chewed leaves, in self-wiping with leaves 
(van Lawick-Goodall, 1968) and in aimed throwing of sticks at predator models (Kort- 
landt, 1963). Van Lawick-Goodall (1971) described a case of object-object manipulation 
(banging together kerosene cans) in agonistic displays by one male chimpanzee. Wild 
chimpanzees display tool manufacture in the preparation of probes for termiting and 
in the production of leaf sponges (this activity does not involve object-object mani- 
pulation) (van Lawick-Goodall, 1968). 
Termite foraging is a complex process requiring a knowledge of the location of the 
termite mounds, the location of termite tunnels within the mounds, and a knowledge 
of when the termites are about to emerge from their mounds. Termite fishing itself is a 
complex process requiring the choice and preparation of appropriate twigs or stems, 
scraping off the tops of tunnels in the mound, insertion of the right probe at the proper 


PDF PAGE 11
FEEDING ADAPTATIONS 633 
Figure 1. The phylogeny of 
anthropoid primates based on 
comparative immunological data 
on transferrins and albumin, 
taking into account published 
data on DNA hybridization, 
courtesy of Drs Vincent Sarich 
and Jack Cronin (graphics by 
Linda Hagen). 
N~w Worl,t 
Apejr ona 
Hom;n;Jw 
OMk~r'M 
• Mel~ (#pi,~- monA~s) 
Al~Mfa (h~,/tr ~Fr) 
• Pon~ ¢or, u~gulor,,r) 
,Pan (~;mt,o,~.,r ) 
,Oor';ll._.....__a 
,HvlobafeJr (tibl, omr) 
~olob;n~w 
~11,~-, ar, r ~.o a,rta 
tt,,, tim.. of ~, d~lap~';vr 
J',~t;ation of' ~bos jrp¢.:;.~ 
.. .. ,_..... ,.. 
TIME IN MILLIONS OF YE:AR:~ 
angle into the curved tunnel, vibration of the probe at the proper amplitude and fre- 
quency to attract the termites, and withdrawal of the probe at the proper angle and 
speed to avoid knocking termites off the stem or twig (Teleki, 1974). Young chimpanzees 
require years of observational learning and practice before they can termite effectively 
(Teleki, 1974; McGrew, 1977). 
Wild chimpanzees also display proto tool use in the wild (i.e. banging hard-shelled 
nuts on hard surfaces to open them) and the "secondary circular reaction" in repeated 
branch waving in agonistic displays (van Lawick-Goodall, 1968). 
Chimpanzees, like cebus monkeys, are omnivorous tool users; they eat a wide variety 
of plant parts including seeds, fruits, nuts, leaves, blossoms, galls, and dead wood from 
more than eighty plant species, and a significant amount of animal matter, including 
bird's eggs, grubs, Caterpillars, termites, and ants of several species, and small verte- 
brates such as fledgling birds, and larger vertebrates including infant bushbuck and 
bushpig, olive baboons, blue-monkeys, redtail monkeys, and red colobus monkeys 
(van Lawick-Goodall, 1968; Teleki, 1973; Suzuki, 1969). Many of these foods are highly 
seasonal (Suzuki, 1969) and locally variable (Teleki, 1974). Unlike cebus monkeys, 
chimpanzees, are also "stalking hunters" of large prey, as well as "scavenge hunters" 
(searchers and seizers of small relatively immobile prey.) They do not use tools in 
"stalking hunting" (Teleki, 1973). 
Captive gorillas also display intelligent complex object manipulation schemata reflecting 
the method of the "tertiary circular reactions" including raking in out of reach Objects 
(Reynolds, 1967; Beck, 1975; Parker, 1976; Chevalier-Skolnikoff, 1976), and "secondary 
circular reactions" including repeated branch waving (Parker, 1976). Gorillas as well as 
chimpanzees reveal the capacity for symbol manipulation as displayed in American Sign 
Language (Patterson, 1977) perhaps indicating symbolic intelligence. 
Wild gorillas, however, rarely display complex object manipulation (Schaller, 1963). 
The virtual absence of this class of behavior in the wild apparently correlates with their 
relatively narrow, ' strictly herbivorous diet (Fossey, 1974; Schaller, 1963; Sabater Pi & 
Jones, 1971). It is also pertinent that they are so strong that they can tear down trees 
to get at encased pith and hence have little use for tools. 
Captive orang-utans display intelligent complex object manipulation schemata, including 


PDF PAGE 12
634 s.T. PARKER AND K. R. GIBSON 
tool use and tool manufacture: one captive orang-utan, for example, learned to flake 
offa stone tool and used it to cut open a rope around a box (recorded on a film by Wright; 
cited in Pfeiffer, 1969). 
Wild orang-utans rarely display complex object manipulation (MacKinnon, 1974~ Brind- 
amour, 1976). Although orang-utans are primarily frugivorous, they do eat termites 
and hard shelled fruits, but they are sufficiently strong to open these embedded and 
encased foods with their hands and teeth (MacKinnon, 1974; Brindamour, 1976) and 
therefore do not need to use tools in feeding. 
On the basis of these reports, Hamilton's hypothesis (Hamilton, 1973), and our 
interpretation of Piaget's model, we propose that tertiary sensorimotor intelligence arose 
in the common ancestor of cebus monkeys and independently in the common ancestor 
of the great apes and hominids (see Figure 1) as an adaptation for feeding on a variety 
of seasonally available foods susceptible to extraction from a matrix or a case through 
intelligent complex object manipulation, and for discovering and remembering their spatial 
and temporal location. The absence of this feeding pattern in the orang-utan and gorilla 
is probably explained by their subsequent radiation into new feeding niches (Pilbeam & 
Gould, 1974) which do not favor intelligent complex object manipulation.* We suspect that 
tertiary sensorimotor intelligence persisted in these species because there was no evolutionary 
force cperating on it or because it is advantageous in other contexts such as food location 
or communication. 
Since cebus monkeys and great apes diverged from a common ancestor approximately 
35 million years ago (Sarich, 1970; Cronin & Sarich, 1975) and none of their collaterals 
are known to consistently display intelligent tool use, it seems likely that tertiary sensori- 
motor intelligence, arose through parallel evolution in the common ancestor of cebus 
monkeys and the common ancestor of great apes and hominids several million years 
after their divergence from each other (see Figure 1). 
5. Object Manipulation and Intelligence in Other 
Anthropoid Species 
Field and laboratory reports indicate that most anthropoid species display considerable 
simple object manipulation. Several investigators have compared object manipulation of 
monkeysand apes in the laboratory and reported that baboons and macaques rival 
cebus monkeys and chimpanzees in the amount of time they devote to object manipu- 
lation (Glickman & Scroges, 1966; Davis et al., 1968; C. Parker, 1974a, b). The extent 
and frequency of complex object manipulation in monkeys is difficult to assess. Several 
instances of tool use to rake in out-of-reach objects have been reported in captive baboons 
and maca-tues (Beck, 1973a, b; Kltiver, 1937; Warden, Koch & Fjeld, 1940). Warden, 
Koch & Fjeld (1940) even succeeded in training some rhesus macaques to sequentially 
rake in as many as four rakes in order to get an out-of-reach object. Wild baboons (van 
* Nest building is apparently the only class of object manipulation 
common to all the great apes in the wild. This might suggest that 
some complex object manipulation'schemata in apes arose as an adapta- 
tion to nest building. Field reports of nest building, however, suggest 
that it does not involve trial and error object-object manipulations 
¢1; ~, and recombinations, such as the weaving Schiller described in 
captiv e chimpanzees (Schiller, 1949), and we therefore classify it as 
simple object manipulation. 


PDF PAGE 13
FE~.DINO ADAPTATIONS 635 
Lawick-Goodall, 1973) and macaques (Chaing, 1967) have been reported to use leaves to 
wipe themselves. Wild Japanese macaques have been reported to wash sweet potatoes in 
sea water (Kawai, 1965) and to drop wheat into sea water and scoop it out after sand 
has fallen to the bottom (Hinde, 1974); captive Japanese macaques have been reported 
to make snowballs by rolling snow on the ground (Eaton , 1976). These behaviors were 
invented by trial and error or insight and spread througtl observational learning. Sweet 
potato washing and snowball making and placer mining wheat involve object-substrate 
manipulation .and should therefore be classified as proto tool use. It is interesting to note 
in the context of Hamilton's hypothesis that baboons, at least, are highly omnivorous 
(DeVore & Hall, 1968; Hall, 1962), but the rarity and limited scope of complex object 
manipulation and tool use in captivity and in the wild suggests that tertiary sensorimotor 
intelligence has not been selected in these species.* 
Beck recently published an extensive review of tool use in non-human primates (Beck, 
1975). His catalogue of types of tool use in monkeys is longer than that of most other 
reviewers (Hall, 1968; van Lawiek-Goodall, 1970) because of his own recent discovery of 
tool use in captive hamadryas and guinea baboons (Beck 1973a,b) and because he 
classifies unaimed throwing and object dropping and waving as tool use. He also lengthens 
his catalogue by including data from anonymous and second and third hand reports cited 
by Kortlandt & Kooij (1963). Even using Beck's catalogue of types of tool use in primates, 
it is clear that Cebus display more types of complex object manipulation than Other monkeys: 
Beck cites 11 different types of tool use in cebus monkeys, as compared to 9 in baboons; 
5 in macaques; and no more than 4 in other monkeys; and to 20 in chimpanzees; 12 in 
orang-utans; 6 in gorillas; 4 in gibbons. 
The majority of the evidence indicates that cebus monkeys surpass all other monkeys 
and compare favorably with chimpanzees in the amount and scope of their complex object 
manipulation; even so, it is clear that some baboons and macaques display a propensity 
for complex Object manipulation. 
6. Object Manipulation and Tool Use in 
Other Vertebrate Species 
Several other vertebrate species d/splay context specific tool use and proto tool use in various 
contexts, including foraging and feeding, grooming, nest construction , and epigamic 
and agonistic displays (Hall, 1968; Van Lawick-Goodall, I970; Alcock, 1972). According 
to Alcock (1972, 1975) nearly all those species who use tools in foraging and feeding do 
so to obtain foods they couldnot obtain by means of their anatomical equipment alone: 
sea otters, for example, break open mollusk shells they cannot otherwise break, with the 
aid of stones; Galapagos finches use twigs to extract insect larvae they could not other- 
wise reach from cracks in tree bark; vultures drop Stones on ostrich eggs to open them. 
According to Hamilton, most tool using vertebrates are "scavenge hunters" who search 
* Parker's developmental study of a captive infant stumptail 
macaque revealed an absence of the "secondary circular reactions" 
and the "tertiary circular reactions" characteristic of the third and 
fifth stages of the Sensorimotor Intelligence Series in chimpanzee, 
gorilla, and human infants, but the presence of ananalogous series 
of sensorimotor stages involving the elaboration of secondary linear 
schemata (Parker, 1973, 1977) (see Table 5). 


PDF PAGE 14
636 S. T. PARKER AND K, R. GIBSON 
for and seize relatively immobile prey smaller than themselves (not dead animals, as 
scavenging implies). He classifies black-breasted buzzards, buzzards, Galapagos finches, 
brown-headed nuthatches, sea otters, chimpanzees, cebus monkeys and"preman" as tool- 
using "scavenge hunters". He characterizes "scavenge hunters" as omnivores, who 
spend more time searching for food than do "sentinel" and "stalking" hunters of larger, 
more mobile prey (Hamilton, 1973). Although we agree with Hamilton that cebus 
monkeys and chimpanees and early man are and were omnivorous "scavenge hunters" 
(or "collector predators,' in Teleki's terms), we do not believe that the other tool-using 
species he lists fit this pattern. As indicated above, we believe that these context specifictool 
users are dietary specialists (see Table 3). 
7. The Evolution of Object Manipulation 
Schemata and Intelligence 
In this section we address two related but separable issues: the evolution of specific 
object manipulation schemata , and the evolution of the capacity for the intelligent 
applicatio n of object manipulation schemata. This distinction is critical to understanding 
the relationship between object manipulation, tool use, and intelligence. 
It seems likely that specific object manipulation schemata were selected in several 
different behavioral contexts. Simple object and object-substrate manipulation in anthro- 
poid species occurs in a Variety of domains, including feeding, grooming, agonistic 
displays, nestingin the case of great apes, and, of course, in play, which involves motor 
patterns from all other contexts (Dolhinow & Bishop, 1970) ; object dropping and unaimed 
throwing schemata occur during agonistic displays (Hall, 1968; Washburn & Jay, 
1967); uncovering, digging, rubbing, rotating, and pulling apart schemata occur during 
foraging and feeding, suggesting that these schemata may have been selected for their 
value in feeding; pincer grasping and plucking of small objects occur in feeding and 
grooming, suggesting that these schemata may have been selected in both domains. 
Object-substrate manipulation schemata such as rubbing objects on a surface may also have 
been selected for food preparation. 
Anthropoid species display trial and error variation, differentiation and recom- 
bination of these simple object manipulation and object-substrate manipulation schemata, 
indicating secondary linear sensorimotor intelligence (Parker, 1973, 1976, 1977). It seems likely 
that selection for more efficient foraging and feeding was the primary factor favoring 
the evolution of this capacity. . 
Complex object manipulation schemata also occur in more than one domain: both cebus 
monkeys and chimpanzees have been reported to use tools in aimed throwing and 
clubbing (Kortlandt & Kooij, 1963; Kortlandt, 1963), suggesting that these schemata 
may. have evolved from unaimed object throwing or dropping; on the other hand probing 
and poking objects inside holes, and raking in out-of-reach objects occur in foraging 
and feeding, suggesting that these Schemata may have evolved in this domain, probably 
from simple object manipulation schemata and object-substrate schemata. 
All students of the evolution of tool use in animals (Kortlandt, !963; Washburn & 
Jay, 1967; Lancaster, 1968; van Lawick-Goodall, 1970; Alcock, 1972; Hamilton, 1973) 
agree implicitly that tool use evolved from simpler varieties of object manipulation; 
indeed the principle of the opportunism and conservatism of evolution demands this 


PDF PAGE 15
FEEDING ADAPTATIONS 637 
interpretation, but they do not distinguish specific t0ol-using schemata from general. 
tool-using abilities, that is, intelligence. Their theories may explain the evolution of 
specific tool-using schemata, but they do not explain the evolution of intelligence. 
Although complex object manipulation schemata may have arisen in several different 
domains, this does not mean that the behavioral programs allowing trial and error 
variation and flexible recombination of these schemata in the search for new means, 
i.e. tertiary sensorimotor intelligence, arose in all these domains. We believe that these 
behavioral programs had their origin in pre-existing behavioural programs generating 
new trial and error combinations of simple object and object substrate manipulation schemata 
in other anthropoid species, i.e. in secondary linear sensorimotor intelligence. We believe that 
tertiary sensorimotor intelligence was favored in situations of locally variable limited seasonal 
availability of embedded or encased high protein foods susceptible to extractive foraging 
and feeding with the aid of trial and error object-object manipulations based on an 
understanding or causality. Once intelligence evolved, it would allow broad appli- 
cation of Complex object manipulation schemata. 
We believe thatthis explains the case of Mike, the chimpanzee fi'om the Gombe 
Stream Reserve who was able to increase his rank tlarough premeditated agonistic displays 
with several tumbling kerosene cans. This expression of tertiary sensorimotor intelligence 
in social tool use was the unique invention of an unusually intelligent animal (van Lawick- 
Goodall 1971). It seems likely that intelligent complex object manipulation in social tool 
use occurs only in unusually intelligent animals who are able to significantly inhibit 
their excitement, and apply insight or trial and error manipulations to c/'eate new means 
to solve the problem of intimidating or attacking anadversary (Gibson & Parker, in 
preparation). 
If our hypothesis is correct, field studies of cebus and chimpanzee species should 
reveal more intelligent complex object manipulation schemata devoted to foraging and feeding 
on embedded or encased foods (and in play and observational learning involving these 
schemata) than other activities, such as agonistic displays. If selection is still operating 
On tertiary sensorimotor intelligence for foraging and feeding, studies should reveal differential 
survival and reproductive success correlated with individual differences in intelligent 
complex object manipulation in foraging and feeding. 
Obviously, it is impossible to directly test our general hypothesis that tertiary sensori- 
motor intelligence arose in the common ancestor of cebus monkeys and the common an- 
cestor of great apes and hominids. It may be possible, however, to reconstruct the ana- 
tomy and behaviour of the common ancestors from fossil and comparative anatomical 
data, and on this basis to select and study living species as living models of the common 
ancestors. 
Of the three gener a and four species of great apes, only one, Pan troglodytes, is known 
to display intelligent complex object manipulation in foraging and feeding. If the other 
chimpanzee species, Pan paniscus, als0 displays this pattern, it will support our hypothesis 
that tertiary sensorimotor intelligence was selected in tF.e common ancestor of great apes and 
hominids. Although there are no data on foraging and feeding in this species, laboratory 
evidence indicates that Pan paniscus may be superior to:Pan troglodytes in its object mani- 
pulation abilities (Savage, 1976). This is especially significant, because comparative 
dental and anatomical data indicate that pygmy chimpanzees are evolutionarily con- 
servative and may be similar to Ramapithecus and/or some Dryopithecus species, and hence 
similar to early hominids or early hominoids (Pilbearn & Simons, cited by Bourne, 


PDF PAGE 16
638 s.T. PARKER AND K. R. GIBSON 
1976; Cronin, Zihlman & Krammer, 1977) (and hence perhaps similar to the common 
ancestor of great apes, or of great apes and hominids). 
All four species of cebus monkeys (Hill, 1960; Herschkovitz, 1949) apparently display 
tertiary sensorimotor intelligence (Hill, 1960). Although their feeding behaviors have not 
been studied in detail, dental differences suggest dietary specialization in the heavier 
form, Cebus ap'ella, as compared to the three other species (C. albifrons, C. nigrivittatus and 
C. capuchinus); Cebus apella display some of the features of the T-complex, which also 
occurs in gorillas (Kinzey, 1974). This suggests that the other three cebus species are 
more evolutionarily conservative (Kinzey, 1974), and that one or more of them may 
provide a living model of the common ancestor of cebus species. 
Field studies of many animal species will be necessary to test our general hypothesis 
that context specific tool use is an adaptation for feeding on a single class of nonseasonal 
embedded food sources common to the whole population or species range, while intelli- 
gent tool use is an adaptation for feeding on a variety of seasonally limited embedded 
food sources often limited to particular parts of the species range. 
Comparative studies should focus on the number of complex object manipulation schemata, 
the number of contexts in which they are displayed, the number of objects employed, 
and the ontogeny of the patterns (to determine if they develop through invention and 
im,itation or through trial and error shaping through reinforcement in a narrow context) ; 
they should also focus on the variation or lack of variation from individual to individual 
and group to group in complex object manipulation schemata (i.e. on their species specific 
or traditional nature), and on the seasonality or non-seasonality of the embedded food 
sources and on their distribution in the species range. 
8. Conclusions 
We have proposed a taxonomy for distinguishing various forms of object manipulation 
(simple prehension, simple object manipulation, object-substrate manipulation, complex object mani- 
pulation and social-object manipulation), and we have distinguished various forms of tool 
use (true tool use, proto tool u~e and social tool use) on the basis of our object manipulation 
categories. We have distinguished between intelligent and context specific tool use on 
the basis of criteria drawn from Piaget's Sensorimotor Series stages in human infants. 
We have proposed that intelligent tool use based on tertiary sensorimotor intelligence arose 
as an adaptatioh for extractive foraging and feeding on a variety of seasonally limited 
local embedded food sources in the common ancestor ofcebus monkeys and independently 
in the common ancestor of great apes and hominids. ~'Ve have pointed out that context 
specific tool use is not diagnostic of tertiary sensorimotor intelligence despite similarities in 
object manipulation schemata. We have proposed that specific object manipulation 
schemata evolved independently of the intelligence guiding their application as new 
means to new and old ends. 
We are grateful to Drs Phyllis Dolhinow, Joh n Oppenheimer, David Gordon, Elbert 
Branscomb and Mildred Dickeman, and to Peter Parker and Crystal Baker for helpful 
criticisms of earlier drafts of this article. We are also grateful" to Dr Vincent Sarich for 
providing the information in Figure 1, and to Frances Baker for typing and editing the 
rhanuscript. Wealso want to acknowledge Dr Suzanne Chevalier-Skolnikoffwith whom 


PDF PAGE 17
FEEDING ADAPTATIONS 639 
we discussed our hypothesis concerning the adaptive significance of sensorimotor intelli- 
gence in cebus monkeys, and who subsequently worked with us briefly in observing 
cebus monkeys at San Diego Wild Animal Park and the San Francisco Zoo, and in 
seeking a field site to test our hypothesis. The authors, of course, take full responsibility 
for the ideas presented here. 
References 
Alcock, J. (1975). Animal Behavior: An Evolutionary Approach. Sunderland, Mass.: Sinauer Assoc. Inc. 
Alcock, J. (1972). The evolution of the use of tools by feeding animals. Evolution 26, 464-473. 
Baldwin, J. & Baldwin, .1. (1972). The ecology and behavior of Squirrel monkeys (Siamiri oerstedi) in a 
natural forest in western Panama. Folia primatologica 18, 161-184. 
Beck, B. (1976). Predatory shell dropping by Herring gulls. Preliminary report paper delivered at the 
1976 Annual Meeting of the Behavior Socilety, Boulder, Colorado. 
Beck, B. (1975). Baboons, chimpanzees and tools. Journal of Human Evolution 3, 509-516. 
Beck, B. (1975). Primate tool behavior. In Socioecology and Psychology of Primates (R. Tuttle, ed.). The 
Hague: Mouton Publishers. 
Beck, B. (1973a). Observation learning of tool use by captive Guinea baboons (Papio papio). American 
Journal of Physical Anthropology 38, 579-582. 
Beck, B. (1973b). Co-operative tool use by captive hamadryas baboons. Science 182, 594-597. 
Bertrand, M. (1969). The Behavioral Repertoire of the Stumptail Macaque. B}blioteca Primatological No. 11. 
Basel: Karger. 
Bierens de Haan, J. A. (1931). Werkzeuggebraueh and Werkzeugherstellung hei einum Niediren 
Berhn. Affen (Cebus hypoleucus humb.). Zeitschrift fiir Vergleichende Physiologic, " 
Bourne, G. (1976). Pygmy chimpanzees at the Yerkes Center. Yerkes New~letter 13 (1). 
Carpenter, C. R. & Locke, N. M. (1937). Notes on symbolic behavior in a cebus monkey Cebus 
appela. Journal of Genetic Psychology 51, 267-278. 
Chapman, F. M. (1938). Life in an Air Castle. New York, London: D. Appleton-Century Company. 
Chapman, F. M. (1929). My Tropical Air Castle. New York, London: D. /~ppleton and Company. 
Chevalier-Skolnikoff, S. (1976). The ontogeny of primate intelligence and !its implications for Com- 
municative potential. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 180, 173-211. 
Chiang, M. (1967). Use of tools by wild Macaque monkeys in Singapore. Nature 214, 1258-1259. 
Chlvers, D. J., Raemackers, J. J. & Aldrich-Blake, F. (1975). Long-term observations of siamang 
behavior. FoIia primotologica 23, 1-49. 
Clutton-Brock, T. H. (1974). Primate social organization and ecology. Nature 250, 539-542. 
Cronin, J. & Sarich, V. (1975). Molecular systematics of the New World monkeys. Journal of Human 
Evolution 4, 357-375. 
Cronin, J., Zihlman, A. & Krammer, D. (1977). Pygmy chimpanzees: a model of hominid origins 
(in preparation). 
Davis, R. T.(1974). Monkeys as Perceivers. New York and London: Academic Press. 
Davis, R. T., Leafy, R. W., Caseben-Smith, M. D. & Thompson, R. F. (1968). Species differences in 
the gross behavior of the non-human primates. Behavior 31, 326-328. 
Devore, I. & Hall, K. R. L. (1965). Baboon ecology. In Primate Behavior (DeVore, I., ed.). New 
York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston. 
Dolhinow, P. & Bishop, N. (1970). The development of motor skills and social relationships among 
primates through play. In Minnesota Symposiu'n on Child Psychology 4, 141-198. 
Eaton, G. (1976). The social order of Japanese macaques. Scientific American 235 (4), 96-106. 
Ellefson, J. (1968). Territorial behavior in the common White-handed gibbon, H.ylobates lar Linn. In 
Primates (P. C. Jay, ed.). New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston. 
Fossey, D. (1974). Observations on the home range of one group of Mountain gorillas (Gorilla gorilla 
beringei). Animal Behaviour 22, 568-581. 
Freese, C. (1975). Personal communication. 
Galdikas-Brindamour, B. (1976). Public l.:cture before the California Academy of Sciences. San 
Francisco, 4 May. 
Gibson, K. R. & Parker, S. T. (1976). Sensorimotor intelligence as an adaptation to feeding strategies 
in wild Cebus monkeys. Paper delivered at the Annual Meeting of the Animal Behaviour Society, 
Boulder, Colorado, 23 June. 
Gibson, K. R. & Parker, S. T. The evolution of intelligence (in preparation). 
Gliekman, S. E. & Scroges, R. W. (1966). Curiosity in zoo animals. Behavior 26, 151-188. 
Hahn, E. (1971). Reporter at large. New Yorker Magazine, 24 April. 


PDF PAGE 18
640 S. T, PARKER AND K. R. GIBSON 
Island, Pamana. 
Kawai, M. (1965). 
on Koshima Isles. 
Kinzey, W. (1974). 
3, 193-203. 
Hall, K. R. L. (1968). Tool-using performance as indicators of behavioral adaptability. In Primate 
Studies in Adaptation and Variability (P. C. Jay, ed.). New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston. 
Hall, K. R. L. (1962). Numerical data maintenance and activities and locomotion of the wild Chacma 
baboon, Papio ursinus. Proceedings of the Zoological Society of London 139, 181-220. 
Hall, K. R. L. & Schaller, G. B. (1964). Tool-using behavior in California sea otter. Journal of 
AIammalogy 't5, 287-298. 
Hamilton, Win. J. III (1973). Life's Color Code. New York: McGraw-Hill, Inc. 
Hernandez-Camacho, J. & Cooper. R. (1976). Non-human primates in Colombia. In Neotropical 
Primates: Field Studies and Conservation (R. J. Thorington, and P. C. Heltne, eds). New York: National 
Academy of Sciences. 
Hershkovitz, P. (1947). Mammals of northern Columbia: preliminary report no. 4: monkeys (Primates), 
with taxonomic revisions of some forms. Proceedings of the U.S. National Museum 98~ 323-427. 
Hill, W. C. O. (1960). Primates. IV. Cebidae. Edinburgh University Press, pp. 322.-490. 
Hinde, R. (1974). Biological Bases of Human Social Behaviour. McGraw-Hill. 
Hladik, C. & Hladik, A. (1969). Rapports trophiques entre vegetation et primates dans la Foret de 
Barro Colorado (Panama). LaTerre et la Vie, pp. 25-117. 
Jolly, A. (1972). The Evolution of Primate Social Behavior. MacMillan. 
Kaufman, J. H. (1962). Ecology and social behavior of the Coati Nasua narica on Barro Colorado 
University of California Publications in Zoology 60 (3), 95-222. 
Newly acquired pre-cultural behavior of the natural troop of Japanese macaques 
Primates 6, 1-30. 
Ceboid models for the evolution of hominoid dentition. Journal of Human Evolution 
Klein, L. (1972). The ecology and social organization of the Spider monkey, Ateles bulzebuth. Ph.D. 
Dissertation, University of California, Berkeley. 
Klein, L. & Klein, D. (1973). Observations of two types of neotropical intertaxa associations. American 
Journal of Physical Anthropology 38 (2), 649-654. 
Klein, L. & Klein, D. (1975). Social and ecological contrasts between four taxa of neotropical primates. 
In Socioecology and Psychology of Primates (R. Tuttle, ed.). The Hague: Mouton. 
Kliiver, H. (1933). Behaviour Mechanisms in Monkeys. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press. 
Kliiver, H. (1937). Re-examination of implement using behavior in a Cebus monkey after an interval 
of three years. Aaa Psychologica 2, 347-397. 
Kohler, W. (1927). The Mentality of Apes. New York: Random House. 
Kortlandt, A. (1963). Chimpanzees in the wild. Scientific American. 
Kortlandt, A. & Kooij, M. (1963). Protohominid behavior in primates (preliminary communication). 
Symposia of the Zoological Society of London 10, 61-68. 
Lancaster, J. (1968). On the evolution of tool-using behavior. American Anthropologist 70, 56-66. 
MacArthur, R. (1972). Geographic Ecology Patterns in the Dispersion of Spedes. New York: Harper & Row. 
McGrew, W. C. (1976). Socialization and object manipulation in wild chimpanzees. In Biosocial 
Development among Primates (Poirier & Chevalier-Skolnikoff, eds). New York: Garland (in press). 
Menzel, E. (1972). Spontaneous invention of ladders in a group of young chimpanzees. Folia primato- 
logica 17, 87-106. 
Oppenheimer, J. (1968). Behavior and ecology of the White-faced Monkey, Cebus capucinus, on Barro 
Colorado Island. C. Z. Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Illinois. 
Oppenheimer, J. R. (1969). Changes in forehead patterns and group composition of the White-faced 
monkey ( Cebus capueinus). Proceedings of the 2nd International Congress on Primatology, Atlanta Ca. 1, 36--42. 
Basel, New York: Karger. 
Oppenheimer, J. R. (1973). Social and eommunicatory behavior in the Cebus monkey. In (C. R. 
Carpenter) Behavioral Regulators of Behavior in Primates. Bucknell University Press, Lewisburg, Pa., 
pp. 251-271. 
Parker, S. T. (1973). Piaget's Sensorimotor Series in an infant macaque: the organization ofnon-stereo- 
typed behavior in the evolution of intelligence. Ph.D. Dissertation, Department of Anthropology, 
University of California, Berkeley. 
Parker, S. T. (1976). A comparative longitudinal study of sensorimotor development in a gorilla, a 
human, and a macaque infant from a Piagetian perspective. Paper delivered at the Annual Meeting 
of the Animal Behavior Society, Boulder, Colorado, 23 June. 
Parker, S. T. (1977). Piaget's Sensorimotor Series in an infant macaque: a model for comparing 
unstereotyped behavior and intelligence in human and non-human primates. In Bibsocial Develop- 
ment among Primates (S. Chevalier-Skolnikoff & F. Poirier, eds). New York: Garland (in press). 
Patterson, F. (1977). The gestures of a gorilla: language acquisition in another primate species. In 
Perspectives in Human Evolution, Vol. IV (Hamburg, Goodall, McCown, eds). Menlo Park: Benjamin 
Press (in press). 
Piaget, J. (1952). The Origins oflntelligence in Children. New York: Norton. 


PDF PAGE 19
FEEDING ADAPTATIONS 641 
Suzuki, A. (1969). 
Teleki, G. (1973). 
Teleki, G. (1974). 
3j 575-594. 
Teleki, G. (1975). 
Piaget, J. (1954). Construction of Reality in the Child. New York: Bellantine Books. 
Pilbeam, D. & Gould, S. (1974). Size and sealing in human evolution. Science 186, 892-901. 
Rensch, B. (1973). Play and art in apes and monkeys. In Precultural Primate Behavior (E. Menzel, ed.). 
Symposium IVth Internat. Congress Primat. Vol. 1. Basel: Karger. 
Romanes, G.J. (1882). Animal Intelligence. London: Kegan, Paul, Trench & Coo 
Sabater Pi & Jones, C. (1973). Comparative Ecology of Gorilla gorilla (Savage and Wyman) and Pan troglo- 
dytes (Blumcnbach) in Rio Muni, West Afiica. Basel: Karger. 
Sarich, V. (1970). Primate systematies with special reference to Old World monkeys: a protein 
perspective. In Old World Monkeys (Napier, J. R. & Napier, P. H., eds). New York: Academic Press. 
Savage, S. (1976). Preliminary observations on the behavior of the Pygmy chimpanzee. Yerkes News- 
letter 13 (I). 
Schaller, G. (1963). The Mountain Gorilla Behavior and Ecology. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
Schiller, P. (1949). Innate motor action as a basis of learning. In Instinctive Behavior (P. Schiller, ed.). 
Stephan, H. (1972). Evolution of primate brains: a comparative anatomical investigation. In (R. Tuttle, 
ed.). The Functional and Evolutionary Biology of Primates, pp. 155-174. Chicago, New York: Aidlne- 
Atherton. 
Struhsaker, T. & Hunkeler, P. (!971). Evidence of tool-using by chimpanzees in the Ivory Coast. 
Folia primatologia 15, 212-229. 
An ecological study of chimpanzees in a savanna woodland. Primates 10, 103-148. 
The Predatory Behavior of Wild Chimpanzees. Lewisburg: Bucknell University Press. 
Chimpanzee subsistence technology: materials and skills. Journal of Human Evolution 
Primate subsistence patterns: collector-predators and gatherer-hunters. Journal of 
Human Evolution 4 (2), 125-184. 
Thorington, R. W., Jr. (1967). Feeding and activity of Cebus and Saimiri in a Columbian forest. In 
Starck, D., Schneider, R. & Kuhn, J. J., eds). Neue Ergebnisse der Primatologie. Progress in Primatology. 
Stuttgart: Gustav Fischer Verlag. 
Thorington, R. W., Jr. (1970). Feeding behavior of non-human primates in the wilderness. In Feeding 
and Nutrition in Non-human Primates (R. S. Harris, ed.). New York: Academic Press. 
Van Lawick-Goodall, J. (1968). The behaviour of free-ranging chimpanzees in the Gombe Stream 
Reserve. Animal Behaviour Monograph. 
Van Lawick-GoodalI, J. (1970). Tool-using in primates and other vcrtebrates. In Advances in the Study 
of Behavior, Vol. 3 (D. S. Lehrman, R. A. Hinde & E. SHaw, eds). New York: Academic Press. 
Van Lawick-Goodall, J. (1971). In The Shadow of Man. Dell. 
Ververs, G. & Weiner, J. (1963). Use of a t0ol by a captive Capuchin monkey. Primates: Symposium of 
the Zoological Society of London, No. 10. 
Warden, C. J., Koch, A. M. & Fjeld, H. A. (1940). Instrumentation in Cebus and Rhesus monkeys. 
Journal of General Psychology 56, 297-310. 
Washburn, S. L. & Jay, P. (1967). More on tool use among primates. Current Anthropolo~. 8, 253-254. 
