PDF PAGE 1
Re-evaluating the extractive foraging hypothesis
Sue Taylor Parker *, 1
Anthropology Dept, Sonoma State University, 1801 E. Cotati Avenue, Rohnert Park, CA 94928, USA
article info
Article history:
Available online 4 December 2014
Keywords:
Extractive foraging
Brain measures
Intelligence
Primates
Phylogeny
Piaget
abstract
In his seminal 1992 paper, Dunbar examined three hypotheses advanced to explain pri-
mate intelligence, arguing that whereas his social group size hypothesis was supported,
neither of two ecological hypotheses, the extractive foraging and frugivory hypotheses,
were supported. Following this, and Dunbar's subsequently elaborated argument, many
investigators concluded that primate intelligence arose as social rather than ecological
adaptations. This paper questions Dunbar's characterization of extractive foraging and
social intelligence as alternative hypotheses, raises sampling issues about Dunbar's brain
data, species choice, and measurement of extractive foraging. It summarizes the extractive
foraging hypothesis, and counters its critics. It reexamines the hypothesis in light of recent
behavioral and brain data, new methodology for quantifying extractive foraging, and a new
phylogeny of primate intelligence. It concludes that the extractive foraging hypothesis is
now supported by several converging lines of evidence.
© 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
The extractive foraging hypothesis ( Gibson, 1986;
Parker, 1996; Parker & Gibson, 1977; 1979 ) argues that a
complex of cognitive abilities in great apes arose as an
adaptation for exploiting a variety of high-energy
embedded foods through intelligent tool use and its so-
cial transmission. It argues that hominids progressively
extended and elaborated these abilities using a variety of
tools on an increasing number of resources, which they
came to depend on throughout the year rather than
seasonally as great apes do. The hypothesis further states
that increased brain size of great apes and hominids arose
as part of this adaptation.
According to this model, tool use characteristic of late
(6th stage) sensorimotor intelligence (as de ﬁned by Piaget
(1962)) arose in the common ancestor of great apes as an
adaptation for foraging on a variety of high value seasonal
foods accessible only through dipping or ﬁshing,
excavation, opening or removing with a tool ( Parker &
Gibson, 1977). These abilities were manifested seasonally,
for example, in chimpanzees' termite and ant ﬁshing,
honey harvesting, and nut cracking, when fruits were
scarce. Wild chimpanzees display the capacity for self-
awareness, manual imitation, and demonstration teaching
(Boesch 1991 ) as means for transmitting tool using skills
from mothers to offspring. Parker (1996) called this
cognitive complex, apprenticeship, arguing that it arose as
part of an adaptation for social transmission of extractive
foraging. The extractive foraging hypothesis is a socio-
ecological, rather than a strictly ecological model.
This hypothesis uses Piaget's cognitive model as a basis
for comparing the extent and timing of cognitive devel-
opment in monkeys, great apes and humans. Piaget's
model facilitates reconstruction of the evolution of intel-
lectual development, suggesting that human ancestors
added new stages of cognitive development and acceler-
ated the pace of development of existing stages. This hy-
pothesis explains why humans are more intelligent than
great apes, and great apes are more intelligent than mon-
keys. It also explains the general association between
extractive foraging, tool use and brain size in cebus mon-
keys as well as many bird species.
* Tel.: þ1 707 795 2312, þ1 415 305 3432 (mobile).
E-mail address: parker@sonoma.edu.
1 Fellow of the California Academy of Sciences.
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
New Ideas in Psychology
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/newideapsych
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.newideapsych.2014.1 1.001
0732-1 18X/© 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
New Ideas in Psychology 37 (2015) 1 e12

PDF PAGE 2
In his in ﬂuential 1992 paper, Robin Dunbar examines
three “alternative hypotheses” proposed to explain primate
cognition and brain size: the social cognition hypothesis
(Byrne & Whiten 1988; Cheney & Seyfarth, 1990;
Humphrey, 1976 ), the frugivorous foraging hypothesis
(Milton, 1988 ), and the extractive foraging hypothesis
(Gibson, 1986; Parker & Gibson, 1977, 1979). He argues that
only the social hypothesis is supported. His paper has been
widely cited as evidence for the social hypothesis and
against ecological hypotheses. This, and subsequent papers
with the same conclusion (e.g., Dunbar, 1993; 1998)h a v e
convinced many investigators that the extractive foraging
hypothesis has been disproved.
Until recently ( Reader, Hager, & Laland 201 1), efforts to
test hypotheses explaining primate cognition and brain size
have found measures for quantifying frugivory, but not
extractive foraging (e.g., Deaner, Nunn, & van Schaik, 2000;
Dunbar, 1998; Reader & Laland, 2002 ). This paper begins
with a critical analysis of Dunbar's 1992 argument against
the extractive foraging hypothesis. Then it revisits the
extractive foraging hypothesis, and presents new data
relevant to evaluating that hypothesis.
2. Reviewing Dunbar's conclusions about extractive
foraging and social intelligence
In this seminal paper, Dunbar (1992) compares three
“alternative” explanations for primates' large brains by
plotting brain measures against social and environmental
measures. For the social intellect hypothesis, he uses mean
group size; for the frugivore foraging hypothesis, mean
percent of fruit in diet; in contrast, for the extractive
foraging hypothesis, he uses extractive foragers vs. non-
extractive foragers.
He tests these variables against various neocortical
indices based on data on 38 primate species ( Stephan,
Frahm, & Baron, 1981). Dunbar shows that the neocortical
ratio (the ratio of the neocortex to the rest of the brain
minus neocortical volume) vs. mean group size gives the
best statistical ﬁt. He therefore says “increases in neocortex
size are related to changes in group size rather than
changes in ecological niche or patterns of resource exploi-
tation” (Dunbar, 1992, p. 483). He concludes, “only the so-
cial intellect hypothesis receives support from these
results” (Dunbar, 1992, p. 486). 2
2.1. Dissecting Dunbar's argument
Dunbar's study raises several questions about his
research design. First, contrary to his claim, the three hy-
potheses are not mutually exclusive. Frugivory and
extractive foraging can coexist, as they do in chimpanzees
and cebus monkeys. Ecological and social adaptations can
coexist as when tool use techniques in extractive foraging
are socially transmitted in chimpanzees.
Second, Dunbar's use of Stephan et al. (1981) primate
brain database biases against the extractive foraging hy-
pothesis because it includes one immature gorilla, and no
bonobos or orangutans. Including orangutans would
reduce the signi ﬁcance of Dunbar's statistical association
between brain size and group size because these large
brained apes are semi-solitary ( Gibson & Jesse, 1999 ). It
would favor the extractive foraging hypothesis because
wild orangutans are now known to use tools in feeding on
embedded foods ( Fox & van Schaik, 1999; van Schaik, Fox,
& Sitompul, 1996).
Third, Dunbar's nonparallel measures (group size, per-
centage of dietary fruit, and extractive foraging) of the
three hypotheses make meaningful comparisons dif ﬁcult.
To be parallel, extractive foragers should be arrayed ac-
cording to the degree of their dependence on extractive
foraging; to be meaningful, they should be arrayed ac-
cording to their speciﬁc feeding techniques: e.g., tool users,
proto-tool users vs. manual vs. dental extractive foragers.
Fourth, Dunbar uses the same brain measure to test the
three hypotheses even though they seem to imply different
brain adaptations. Milton's (1988) hypothesis suggests that
enlarged hippocampi in frugivores would be favored for
complex spatial mapping of seasonal fruits. Gibson (1986)
and Gibson and Jesse (1999) argue that absolute brain
size is favored by extractive foraging (see below).
Fifth, the neocortical index is a questionable measure of
intelligence, because, as Barton says, “no known cognitive
process is mediated exclusively by the neocortex. Complex
cognitive processes are mediated by networks that link the
neocortex with many other structures …It is therefore
misleading to view the neocortex as the ‘cognitive’ part of
the brain ” (Barton, 2006 , p.231). Moreover, by measuring
the neocortex against the cerebella and the hippocampi,
the neocortical ratio biases against manual coordination,
motor planning, and spatial skills ( Gibson & Jesse, 1999),
and hence against extractive foraging.
Using another measure, the “executive brain” (volume
of the neocortex and striatum relative to the brain stem)
Reader and Laland (2002) found that, contrary to Dunbar,
primate brain size is signi ﬁcantly correlated with innova-
tion, social learning and tool use. Group size and social
learning were not correlated. They conclude “Our analysis
reinforces the ﬁnding of other recent studies that ecological
hypotheses for brain evolution been prematurely rejected,
that social and ecological intelligence hypotheses not
necessarily be regarded as alternatives ( Reader & Laland,
2002, p. 4440).
3. Elaboration of the extractive foraging hypothesis
The extractive foraging model, argues that early homi-
nids expanded and elaborated on the extractive abilities of
great apes ( Parker & Gibson, 1979 ). They evolved more
advanced preoperational symbolic level intelligence
involving understanding of topological concepts of enclo-
sure and penetration ( Piaget & Inhelder, 1967 ) as they
began to depend on a larger variety of extractible foods.
These foods likely included roots and tubers, grubs, seeds,
2 Dunbar argues that social group size is constrained by neocortical size
and therefore covaries with it. According to his model, language, espe-
cially gossip, maintains group cohesion in human groups. He argues that
as human groups grew larger, language evolved to replace grooming,
which maintains group cohesion in nonhuman primates.
S.T. Parker / New Ideas in Psychology 37 (2015) 1 e122

PDF PAGE 3
fossorial animals, and scavenged prey. Based on his feeding
study of tool use in wild chimpanzees, Yamakoshi (2001,
2004) proposes a similar scenario according to which
early hominids increased their dependence on tools to ac-
cess hard-to-get foods. Several earlier ecological proposals
emphasized tool use for attaining hard-to-get foods (see
history in Parker & Jaffe, 2008), but lacked the speci ﬁcity of
Yamakoshi's scenario. (None of these scenarios used Pia-
getian stages to propose intelligent adaptations.)
Pointing, movement in the direction of food sources,
and mimicking actions of food preparation played a key
role in communication about the location and nature of
hidden food sources ( Parker & Gibson, 1979). Later homi-
nids used worked stone tools to butcher prey as their
spatial knowledge extended to understanding angles and
whole part relations characteristic of concrete operations
(Barth & Call, 2006; Wynn, 1979 ). With increased under-
standing of geometry, aimed throwing of missiles became
increasingly important in hunting and defense. Increasing
levels of intelligence were reﬂected in increased brain sizes
of these hominids ( Parker & Gibson, 1979). This scenario is
consistent with the discovery of cracked marrow bones of
antelopes associated with fossil Australopithecus garhi and
simple worked tools dated about 2.5 million years ago
(Asfaw et al., 1999 ).
Intelligent extractive foraging without tools also favored
enlarged brain size in other primate species. Expanded
brains allow animals to use stationary, cryptic and hidden
foods ( Gibson, 1986). As measured by neocortical progres-
sion indices and encephalization, humans, chimpanzees,
cebus and woolly monkeys, baboons, macaques, guenons,
aye ayes, and orangutans have the largest primate brains
relative to body size: “Each of these omnivorous forms
engages in at least some extractive foraging in the wild,
such as unfolding leaves to obtain encased insects, opening
pods to obtain seeds, and digging grass corms from the
ground” (Gibson, 1986 p. 98).
3.1. Criticisms of the extractive foraging hypothesis
This hypothesis lies at the intersection of contested
deﬁnitions of tool use and intelligence. Whereas Parker and
Gibson (1977) deﬁne tool use as use of a detached object to
change the state or position of another object, Beck (1980)
prefers a broader de ﬁnition, which includes throwing ob-
jects. Some Old World monkeys are tool users by Beck's
deﬁnition but not by Parker and Gibson's de ﬁnition. If
monkeys are tool users, then tool use in great apes is not
unique among Old World anthropoids ( van Schaik, Deaner,
& Merrill, 1999 ). Beck's (1980) deﬁnition led van Schaik
et al. (1999) to conclude that causes of the cognitive
divide between great apes and monkeys are unclear. Like-
wise, based on cebus tool use, other in ﬂuential in-
vestigators have held that there is no evidence that great
apes are more intelligent than monkeys ( Tomasello & Call,
1997).
Russon (2004) questions some elements of the extrac-
tive foraging hypothesis: First, she says that since cebus are
surpassed cognitively by great apes, their similar abilities
cannot be explained by convergent evolution. To the con-
trary, cognitive differences between cebus monkeys and
great apes are predictable because their convergent adap-
tations under similar selection pressures were derived from
different ancestral bases.
Second, she challenges the hypothesis that intelligent
tool use is a derived (new) trait that arose in the last
common ancestor of humans and great apes because it is
rarely seen in wild orangutans and gorillas. The most
parsimonious explanation for the fact that all the great apes
use tools in captivity and most in the wild is that tool use is
a shared derived character in the last common ancestor of
these species (see Section 5.2). Diverging dietary specialties
among the daughter species probably explain different
frequencies of tool use in the wild ( Parker & Gibson, 1979).
Third, she implies that omnivorous seasonal extractive
foraging without tools by baboons and great apes are
contrary to the extractive foraging hypothesis. In both cases
she overlooks the category of intelligent manual extractive
foraging (seen in baboons and continuing in great apes
along with intelligent tool use).
The following sections review comparative data on the
anatomy of manipulators, kinds of object manipulation,
and cognitive and brain characteristics and measures
pertinent to the extractive foraging hypothesis.
3.2. Primate hands and object manipulation
Descriptions of sensorimotor intelligence in primates
are consistent with the few comparative reports of object
manipulation in primates. Torigoe (1985) reported three
categories of object manipulation based on results of C.
Parker's (1974) study of behavioral diversity in ten pri-
mate species: (1) few manual action patterns displayed by
lemurs (prosimians), New World marmoset and spider
monkeys, and Old World leaf-eating monkeys (Colobinae),
(2) varied kinds of manual object manipulation including
object substrate actions displayed by Old World monkeys,
including guenons, mangabeys, macaques, and baboons
(Cercopithecinae) and (3) complex object manipulations
with and without tools displayed by great apes and cebus
monkeys.
Recent reviews of primate object and substrate use in
feeding are consistent with this picture ( Yamakoshi, 2004;
van Schaik et al., 1999 ). van Schaik and colleagues found
“bimanual asymmetric coordination ” (doing different
things with two hands) was reported in great apes and
Cercopithecine, but not in Colobine, monkeys. A brief
comparative description of primate hands illuminates
these differences.
Primates have retained the early mammalian pattern of
5 digits; most or all of their digits bear nails rather than
claws. Prosimians lack individual digit control ( Fleagle,
1999). Anthropoidea have independent digit control and
interdependent use of two hands. Like apes, Old World
monkeys have a saddle joint in the thumb, which allows
them to abduct and rotate the 1st digit in true opposition
with other digits. New World primates, excepting cebus
monkeys, lack that saddle joint, but display pseudo oppo-
sition between the 2nd and 3rd digits. Gibbons, spider,
colobus, and langur monkeys have evolved suspensory
locomotion via elongated ﬁngers and reduced or absent
S.T. Parker / New Ideas in Psychology 37 (2015) 1 e12 3

PDF PAGE 4
thumbs, which prevent them from opposing thumbs to
index ﬁngers (Fragaszy, 1998; Napier, 1993).
Comparative studies of the functional anatomy of hands
and object manipulation have focused on humans, great
apes, cebus monkeys, and macaques. Consistent with the
extractive foraging hypothesis, reviews of object manipu-
lation and substrate use in primate feeding ( van Schaik
et al., 1999; Yamakoshi, 2004 ) suggest that feeding was a
primary selective pressure on these features.
3.3. Sensorimotor intelligence and kinds of object
manipulation
Not all extractive foragers are tool users. Gibson
emphasized that extractive foragers fall into three groups:
The ﬁrst group uses specialized anatomical manipulators
such as heavy beaks or teeth for seed cracking, or teeth
specialized for drilling bark for tree gums. The second
group uses dexterous hands for extraction by object
manipulation. The third group uses tools in extraction.
There are two categories of tool use: context speci ﬁc and
intelligent. Context speci ﬁc tool use is associated with
specialized extractive foraging, for example, Galapagos
ﬁnches using twigs to extract grubs from tree bark, Herring
gulls dropping clams to break their shells, and sea otters
banging shells on rocks held in their chests. In contrast,
intelligent tool use is associated with extractive foraging on
a variety of seasonal embedded foods using different kinds
of tools.
There are two kinds of manual object manipulation: The
ﬁrst is simple object manipulation by grasping, holding and
turning associated with surface feeding. The second is
complex object manipulation including digging, pulling,
twisting, and banging objects on hard surfaces to extracting
incased foods. The latter is associated with advanced 4th
stage sensorimotor abilities as manifested in baboons and
macaques and, possibly other Old World monkeys ( Gibson
1986; Parker & Gibson, 1977).
The extractive foraging model distinguishes different
levels of intelligence corresponding to developmental
stages of human infancy and childhood as described by
Piaget. Great apes display 5th stage sensorimotor and 6th
stage representational intelligence (now known to extend
to early preoperational abilities characteristic of 2 e5 year
old children (Russon & Bard, 1996). Macaques and baboons
evolved some object manipulation patterns characteristic
of advanced 4th stage sensorimotor intelligence in human
infants: searching for hidden objects, hand-to-hand trans-
fer, pulling apart, rotation, rolling, rubbing, and banging as
well as serial application of these schemes ( Antinucci,
1989; Antinucci, Spinozzi, Visalberghi, & Volterra, 1982;
Gibson, 1986; Parker, 1977).
These advanced 4th stage sensorimotor abilities arose as
an adaptation for omnivorous foraging manually for a va-
riety of cryptic foods such as fruits, nuts, and seeds con-
tained in shells; insects contained in leaves or bark; baby
birds or eggs in nests; as well as water and shallow rhi-
zomes susceptible to manual excavation. This extractive
foraging style favored increased manual dexterity ( Gibson,
1986). These monkeys transmit foraging patterns through
social facilitation and observational learning ( Whiten,
2000) rather than through imitation.
The extractive foraging model argues that New World
cebus monkeys evolved some (5th stage) abilities similar
to, but less advanced than, those of great apes through
convergent evolution in extractive foraging ( Parker &
Gibson, 1977 ). Subsequent research has revealed that
several wild cebus populations use stone tools for nut
cracking even using depressions in rocks as anvils
(Fragaszy, Izar, Visalberghi, Ottoni & Gomez de Oliveira,
2004; Phillips, 1998; Waga, Dacier, Pinha & Travares,
2006). (Unlike chimpanzees cebus do not construct anvils
Matsuzawa & Yamakoshi, 1996.) Like chimpanzees ( Boesch
& Acherman-Boesch, 2000 ), wild cebus develop extractive
foraging through years of observation and experimentation
(Fragaszy, 1990; Perry & Manson, 2008 ). Consistent with
their 5th stage level of understanding ( Antinucci, 1989 ),
they do not achieve great ape levels of understanding of
physical causality ( Visalberghi & Limongelli, 1994), or self-
awareness (Roma et al., 2007 ). Nor do they show 5th stage
imitation and social understanding ( Fragaszy et al., 2004 ),
See Table 1.
Another case of convergent evolution of extractive
foraging occurred in a nocturnal prosimian primate from
Madagascar. The aye eaye evolved a context-speci ﬁc form
of manual extractive foraging based on manipulating a
specialized third manual digit with a ball and socket joint
while penetrating and extracting grubs from niches within
tree bark ( Fragaszy, 1998; Gibson, 1986; Sterling &
Povinelli, 1999 ) (see videos www.arkive.org/aye-aye/
daubentonia-madagascaraensis). This may explain the
enlarged brains of these creatures ( Gibson, 1986; Kaufman,
Ahrens, Laidlaw, Zhang, & Ahman, 2006 ).
Finally, convergent evolution of extractive foraging has
occurred several times in birds. In their review, Lefebvre
and associates (Lefebvre, Nicolakis, & Boie, 2002) found 125
cases of tool use among 104 bird species: 39 cases of true
tool use with detached objects in Passerida, Corvida and
Psittaciformes, and 86 cases of borderline or proto-tool use
(baiting, dropping, battering and skewering) in three other
suborders, and no cases of tool use in other avian taxa.
Virtually every case of true tool use involved opening
inaccessible foods. As in primates true tool use in these
species is associated with larger average size of the whole
brain and the neostriatum which, like the neocortex in
mammals, “has the necessary features for both the cogni-
tive and sensory-motor aspects of tool use ” p.963 (Lefebvre
et al., 2002 ).
4. Piagetian stages
Given that the extractive foraging hypothesis uses Pia-
get's model of intellectual development, a brief discussion
of this model is in order. Over a period of sixty years, Piaget
and his colleagues developed a “constuctivist” model of
human intellectual development from birth through
adolescence: 1) the sensorimotor period from birth to 2
years ( Piaget, 1952, 1954 ); 2) the pre-operations period
from 2 to 5 or 6 years beginning with internal represen-
tation of actions and symbols (Piaget, 1962); 3) the concrete
operations period from 5 or 6 to 1 1 or 12 years beginning
S.T. Parker / New Ideas in Psychology 37 (2015) 1 e124

PDF PAGE 5
with classi ﬁcation, seriation and number of concrete ob-
jects (Inhelder & Piaget, 1964; Piaget, 1965, 1974); 4) formal
operations from 1 1 or 12 years to adulthood beginning with
the capacity for propositional logic ( Inhelder & Piaget,
1958). They described cognitive development in domains
of physical knowledge (objects, space, time and causality),
logical knowledge (classi ﬁcation, seriation, number and
possibilities), and social knowledge (imitation, language,
pretend play, and moral development). They found that
children generally developed at similar rates across do-
mains though they showed some “decalage” or temporal
displacements within domains. A number of stage models
owe their inspiration to Piaget's work. These include
Kohlberg's (1969) stages of moral development, Watson
and Fischer's (1980) model of role development, Lewis
and Brooks-Gunn's (1979) and Damon and Hart's (1988)
models of self-understanding. Flavell, Botkin, Fry, Wright,
and Jarvis's (1968) work on perspective taking, and
Perner's (1991) work on theory-of-mind are examples of
extensions of Piaget's work on representation and
egocentrism.
According to Piaget's model, children adapt to the
world by assimilating objects to their schemes and ac-
commodating their schemes to animate and inanimate
objects thereby creating new feedback and progressively
constructing more powerful schemes that extend and
elaborate their adaptations. Such infantile schemes, for
example, as visual following, grasping, and sucking,
assimilate and accommodate to moving objects including
the infant's own hands, graspable objects such as their
own ﬁngers and those of caretakers, their sucking schemes
adapt to the breast, the bottle, and their own thumbs. The
idea is that the developing organism constructs much of
his own environment through feedback from his own ac-
tions on objects and people, which in turn transforms him,
and so on. Piaget viewed this epigenetic process of
cognitive construction as a continuation of prenatal
epigenesis of embryonic and fetal structures through
childhood symbolic communication to adult reasoning.
Coordinations begin at the sensorimotor level, develop at
the object manipulation level, progress to symbolic, and
then abstract levels. Piaget also argued that re ﬂexive
abstraction and the quest for equilibration in the face of
periodic self-generated dis-equilibration is a source of
cognitive growth ( Piaget, 1985 ). See Piaget and Inhelder
(1969) for a general introduction.
Neo-Piagetian studies have generally conﬁrmed Piaget's
model except when they have used new technologies to
study perceptual rather than sensorimotor knowledge
(using the looking paradigm). The sensorimotor period has
been subject to rigorous replication ( Langer, 1980, 1986;
Uzgiris & Hunt, 1975), as has the entire span of cognitive
development (Case, 1985, 1987).
In the seventies and eighties following the cognitive
revolution, American developmental psychologists began
assimilating Piaget's model to the nativist-empiricist
debate on the origins of knowledge in terms of the
information-processing framework. “The general structure
of this anti-Piagetian strategy was to show that some
competency developed earlier than Piagetian theory had
claimed” (Allen & Bickhard, 2013 , p.99). Anti-Piagetian
claims in this “argument from precocity ” can be seen in
numerous innatist studies of object permanence, space,
number, causality, time, and imitation in young infants
based on the differential looking paradigm. These experi-
ments were designed to capture the infant's understanding
of some conceptual content, e.g. by showing a preference
for some “impossible event ” versus a normal event (see
references in Allen & Bickhard, 2013; Müller & Overton,
1998).
Table 1
Three grades of primate intelligence based on seven kinds of object manipulation in extractive foraging after Parker and Gibson (1977): Stage 2, the prosimian
grade; Stages 3 and 4, the monkey grade, and Stage 5 and 6, the great ape grade.
Actions Kinds of foraging Level of sensorimotor intelligence Primate species
Prosimian grade
Use of anatomical organs to extract a
speciﬁc class of foods
Context-speciﬁc extractive foraging on
hidden foods with anatomical organs
Stage 2:
Coordination of primary oral, manual,
visual schemes
Potto
Lemurs (?)
Pygmy Loris
Monkey Grade
Use of anatomical organs to capture &
consume foods
Manual foraging on partially visible &
hidden foods,
active search for covered objects
Partial Stages 3 &4 Actions designed to
recreate a desired effect, different-
iation of schemes,'
Coordinates actions on two objects
Non Marmoset NW
monkeys
Colobines:
OW Leaf & seed
eating monkeys
Use of anatomical organs to uncover &
manipulate a variety of foods on
various substrates (rubbing,
washing, unrolling)
Intelligent manual extractive foraging
for hidden foods & water (roots, fruits,
nuts) active search for covered objects
Advanced Stage 4 Serial application of
familiar schemes on objects and in new
situations,
Cercopithecines:
Guenons ?
Mangabeys ?
Macaques
Baboons
Great ape grade
Use of a detached object (the tool) to
change the state of another object in
a variety of settings
Intelligent proto-tool use and tool use
extractive foraging on a variety of
encased foods
Stage 5 Discovery of new means
through trial & error experimentation,
search for displaced objects
Cebus
Invention of new tools, imitation of
novel manual acts, teaching tool use
Intelligent invention of new tools for
extracting a wide variety of encased
foods
Advanced Stage 6 Invent & imitate new
means through insight, search for
invisibly displaced objects
Chimpanzees
Gorillas
Orangutans
S.T. Parker / New Ideas in Psychology 37 (2015) 1 e12 5

PDF PAGE 6
The ﬁrst objection to these claims is that investigators
have failed to discon ﬁrm Piaget because they are studying
different phenomena, that is, perceptual or ﬁgural rather
than action or operative schemes as Piaget was. The second
objection is that their methodology fails to control for
processes involved in the infant's perception of familiarity
and novelty. The more basic objection is that mental rep-
resentation and cognitive development are based on action
rather than innate perception.
4.1. Comparative uses of Piaget' model
Several features of Piaget's model make it useful for
comparative studies of primate cognition. The ﬁrst of these
is that the close phylogenetic relationship of monkeys, apes
and human entails similar sensorimotor schemes and
similar brain development. The second is the focus on
nonverbal sensorimotor schemes, which allows both
naturalistic and experimental studies of non-linguistic
species. The third is that the sequence of increasingly
complex hierarchical stages re ﬂecting progressively more
advanced cognitive achievements provides a standard for
judging more or less intelligent behaviors. Fourth is the
comprehensive nature of the model, which covers most
cognitive domains. Finally, the developmental stages allow
the comparative study of the extent and pace of develop-
ment among related primate species ( Parker, 1990 ). A
major appeal of the Piagetian framework for comparative
studies is its utility for analyzing spontaneous behaviors
(Chevalier-Skolnikoff, 1977; Dore & Dumas, 1987; Jolly,
1972; Parker, 1977; Pepperberg, 1992; Vauclair, 1996 ),
their development, and their relation to human cognitive
development (e.g., Antinucci, 1989; Chevalier-Skolnikoff,
1977 , 1983; Parker, 1977).
Studies of great apes and cebus also have used Uzgiris
and Hunt's (1975) sensorimotor tests across several
sensorimotor domains (e.g. Hallock & Worobey, 1984;
Mathieu, Daudelin, Dagenais, & Decaire, 1980; Redshaw,
1978). Most studies of prosimians ( Jolly, 1964) and mon-
keys have used only the object concept series (see Mendes
& Huber, 2004; Tomasello & Call, 1997 for references).
Barth and Call (2006) recently published a comparative
study of object displacement in great apes and human
children concluding that they performed at the same level
in most tasks.
Some critics of comparative studies question the validity
of Piaget's model, worrying about anthropomorphism,
enculturation, and inadvertent training effects. Pepperberg
(1992) discusses these issues, concluding, “Few other sys-
tems support valid comparisons among primates, non-
primate mammals, and birds (and possibly other crea-
tures)” (Pepperberg, 1992, p. 1 181). Indeed, no other model
offers these features.
Tomasello and Call (1997) wrongly criticize Piagetian
studies of primate cognition on the following grounds: (1)
it is a general uni-dimensional stage construct, (2) it pro-
poses uniform achievements across cognitive domains in
human infants, (3) it underestimates infant cognition
because it is based on motor behaviors and ignores
perceptual abilities, (4) it does not cover all cognitive do-
mains, and (5) its use to reconstruct abilities of common
ancestors creates a scala naturae. Russon (2004) also criti-
cizes Piaget's model for lack of comprehensive coverage of
theory-of-mind and deception.
Though Piaget's model is a general stage construct, it
covers physical, logical and social domains. The fairly uni-
form achievements it ﬁnds across domains in human
children, contrasts with uneven patterns of achievement in
nonhuman primates.
Piagetian studies of primate cognition have been less
common than other measures, however, many traditional
measures of animal intelligence (e.g, detour problems,
patterned string, invisible displacements, tool use, and
imitation) fall within its scope. Most measures give
compatible results ( Deaner, van Schaik, & Johnson, 2006;
Gibson, Rumbaugh, & Beran, 2001; Reader et al., 201 1 ).
Although Piaget's framework does not explicitly include
such aspects of primate cognition as deception, self-
awareness, or theory-of-mind, their development corre-
lates with his cognitive stages of symbolic development
(Parker & McKinney, 1999).
Whereas human children traverse physical, logical, and
social cognitive domains at similar rates, this is not true of
monkeys and great apes. Baboons and macaques achieve
terminal stages of development at the advanced 4th stage
in physical cognition within the ﬁrst year of life, cebus
monkeys peak at the 5th stage of physical cognition after
several years. Great apes achieve terminal levels of cogni-
tive development comparable to those of two-to four-year
old human children in the pre-operations period but do so
only after six years of age. In contrast to humans, great apes
show uneven development across domains, moving faster
and farther in logical and physical than in social and sym-
bolic domains ( Langer, 1996; Parker & McKinney, 1999).
Grade level differences were observed not assumed as a
scala natura as envisioned by Tomasello and Call ( Parker &
McKinney, 1999).
Comparative Piagetian studies of primates have allowed
investigators to identify species differences in develop-
mental rates and terminal achievements in various cogni-
tive domains. Indeed, inter-domain comparisons have been
especially revealing. Using concepts of heterochrony
(McKinney & McNamara, 1991) these data make it possible
to reconstruct aspects of the evolution of cognitive devel-
opment in Old World monkeys, great apes and humans
(Gomez, 2005; Langer, 1996; Parker & McKinney, 1999). As
in humans, developmental recapitulation of a series of
terminal additions of new evolutionary stages in a series of
ancestors is one possible outcome of heterochrony
(evolutionary changes of developmental timing). Like other
novelties, these new stages arose out of variations in the
pace and extent of preexisting developmental patterns,
which happened to be advantageous in changing environ-
ments. Piaget's model is uniquely suited for such compar-
ative developmental evolutionary studies.
5. Primate brains
Earliest fossils of both New World and Old World
Anthropoidea had small brains, suggesting that brain
enlargement occurred independently in these groups
(Phillips, 2008 , July 9). Several factors contributed to brain
S.T. Parker / New Ideas in Psychology 37 (2015) 1 e126

PDF PAGE 7
enlargement: the shift from nocturnal to diurnal activity
and the attendant evolution of color vision and pattern
recognition was perhaps the most important factor (Barton,
2006; Falk, 2007 ). These changes resulted in an enlarged
parvocellular pathway in the lateral geniculate body as well
as an enlarged occipital cortex ( Barton, 2006 ). Visual
dominance in diurnal life entailed changes in both
ecological and social adaptations, that is, reliance on vision
for locomotion, foraging, and for social communication.
Barton describes the parvocellular-dominated ventral
pathway in the temporal lobe of the cortex that is impor-
tant in social interaction, including areas in the infero-
temporal cortex specializing in faces. He also describes
pathways between this area and the amygdala that respond
to faces: “This ventral stream eprefrontal network may
therefore be best characterized as a system for processing
complex social signals in an emotional context ” (Barton,
2006; p. 234).
In contrast, the evolution of individual digit control,
elaborated grips and object manipulation patterns was
associated with increased somatosensory cortex, cerebellar
and cortico-cerebellar pathways mediating visually guided
reaching and complex motor skills ( Barton, 2006 ). These
skills were associated with lateral cerebellar enlargement.
MacLeod, Zilles, Schleicher, Rilling, and Gibson's, 2003
study shows a signi ﬁcant shift in the size of the cere-
bellum in apes as compared to monkeys, based on an in-
crease in the size of the lateral or neo-cerebellum. The
lateral or neocerebellum is involved in visual-spatial skills,
planning complex movements, and sensory discrimination,
skills involved in extractive foraging and other environ-
mental adaptations ( MacLeod et al., 2003 ).
In their comparative study of brains of New World and
Old World monkeys, Padberg et al. (2007) report parallel
evolution in cebus monkeys and macaques of parietal
cortical areas 2 and 5 involved in proprioception, motor
planning and coordination of visually-guided reaching,
grasping, and manipulation. These brain features correlate
with precision grip and opposable thumbs in cebus, ma-
caques, chimpanzees and humans. In other New World
monkeys these cortical areas are poorly developed corre-
lating with absence of precision grip, opposable thumbs,
and tool use in feeding ( Table 2 ). The authors conclude,
“cortical ﬁelds are the outcome of homologous highly
constrained developmental programs ” (Padberg, Franca
et al. 2007 ; p. 10,1 14) occurring in conjunction with
similar manual actions in cebus, macaques, and great apes.
Likewise Krubitzer and Disbrow (2010) conclude from their
study that enlarged parietal areas 2 and 5 in Old World
monkeys evolved coincident with opposable thumbs and
associated grips.
In light of such specializations, Barton suggests that the
choice of comparative brain measures should depend upon
the behavioral system and the species in question ( Barton,
2006; p. 229).
5.1. Brain measures
Primate brains are notoriously dif ﬁcult to obtain and
prepare consistently. Until recently, the most widely used
primate database included only one or two individuals of a
given species or genus, mainly wild caught ( Stephan et al.,
1981). Its ape sample comprised 1 gibbon, 1 gorilla, and 1
chimpanzee ( Stephan et al., 1981 ). That sample has been
enlarged by neural magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of
live Yerkes animals (e.g., MacLeod et al., 2003 ). The
enlarged sample of diverse origins raises questions of
equivalencies ( Isler, Kirk, & Miller, 2008; Rilling, 2006 ).
Isler et al. (2008) therefore created a new sample by
compiling primate endocranial volumes (ECV). Even if
brain measures are equivalent and unaffected by captivity,
body size differences between males and females, old and
young, wild and captive animals add complexity to brain-
to-body measurement.
Absolute brain size is highly correlated with body size,
which closely predicts brain size when scaling is revealed
by linear regression ( Jerison, 1973, Martin & Harvey, 1985).
Proportional measures compare brain size to body size, or
selected parts of the brain to the rest of the brain thereby
taking allometry into account. Both kinds of measures are
subject to sampling errors.
Absolute brain size is signi ﬁcant because larger brains
entail more convolutions, more extensive cortical mantle,
and more specialized units, hence more complex infor-
mation processing than smaller brains ( Gibson & Jesse,
1999; MacLeod, 2004 ). Some investigators favor absolute
brain size for the study of primate cognition because it
corresponds best with grade-level differences in cognition,
that is, with greater intelligence of great apes as compared
to monkeys, and of monkeys compared to prosimians
(Deaner, Isler, Burkart, & van Schaik, 2007; Gibson et al.,
2001; Gibson & Jesse, 1999).
They argue that absolute size measures best re ﬂect
cognition whether measured by Piagetian standards
(Gibson et al., 2001), or by global cognitive ability measured
by detour, patterned string, invisible displacements, tool
use, object discrimination, oddity, reversal learning, sorting
and delayed response ( Deaner et al., 2006 ). Gibson et al.
(2001) state that, in contrast to absolute brain size,
Table 2
Adapted on the taxonomic distribution of hand grips and actions in
relation to parietal area 2 from Padberg et al. (2007) .
Primate species Opposable
thumb &
precision
grip
Complex
object
manipulation
Tool use
in feeding
Parietal area
2 in cerebral
cortex
New world monkeys
Cebus monkeys Yes Yes Yes Yes
Other NW
monkeys
No No No No
Old world monkeys
Colobus monkeys No No No ?
Guenons Yes Yes No ?
Baboons Yes Yes No ?
Macaques Yes Yes Yes* ?
Great apes
Orangutans Yes Yes Yes ?
Gorillas Yes Yes Yes ?
Chimpanzees Yes Yes Yes Yes
Humans Yes Yes Yes Yes
According to Parker and Gibson's (1977) deﬁnition (tool use involves use
of a detached object to change the state of another object), macaques do
not use tools in feeding.
S.T. Parker / New Ideas in Psychology 37 (2015) 1 e12 7

PDF PAGE 8
various proportional measures fail to differentiate these
grade levels of intelligence. Deaner et al. (2000) reach a
similar conclusion.
Nevertheless, consistent with data on absolute brain
size measured by endocranial volumes (ECV), Isler et al.
(2008) report that proportional brain-to-body measures
of living primates divide them into three grades: grade (1)
with largest relative EVCs includes the apes, Cercopithecine
Old World monkeys, and non-callitrichine New World
monkeys (cebus and spider monkeys); grade (2) with in-
termediate relative EVCs includes Old World Colobine and
New World Callitrichine (marmosets and tamarins) mon-
keys; and grade (3) with the lowest relative EVCs include
the prosimians excluding the aye-ayes. Since brain size
doesn't scale isometrically with male body size in highly
sexually dimorphic species, they used female body weights
in great apes. The difference between apes and Cercopi-
thecine monkeys is statistically signi ﬁcant only for adult
female body size values ( Isler et al., 2008 ).
Regression analysis of co-variation assumes indepen-
dent data points, which may not exist when species have a
recently shared phylogenetic history. Methods of inde-
pendent contrast (e.g., Felsenstein, 1985 ) are used in
conjunction with regression analysis to overcome this bias.
When Rilling (2006) and Isler et al. (2008) applied inde-
pendent contrasts analysis to regression analysis of primate
brain on body size, it lowered the signiﬁcance of differences
in brain size among the primate grades owing to their
common ancestry. (Common ancestry of great apes of
course is explicitly proposed in the extractive foraging
hypothesis.)
In contrast, when Reader et al. (201 1) directly tested
four measures of brain size against their index of general
primate intelligence (g
s1), they found that g s1 scores were a
signiﬁcant predictor of three of four brain measures:
neocortical ratio, executive brain size, and absolute
neocortical size. In this case, independent contrast analysis
yielded similar results. Their measure of brain size is more
relevant than the preceding grade levels based on brain
against body size because their primate grades include
species with varying levels of intelligence.
5.2. Phylogeny and adaptive signi ﬁcance of primate
intelligence
Signiﬁcantly for this analysis, Reader et al. (201 1)
developed a comparative measure of extractive foraging
as one of several indices of behavioral ﬂexibility (extractive
foraging, tool use, social learning, innovation, and tactical
deception) in a meta-analysis of primate intelligence re-
ported in primate literature. They also compiled ecologi-
cally relevant data on dietary breadth, percent of fruit in the
diet, and social group size. Table 3 shows the correlations
they found among these variables. Note the correlation
between extractive foraging, tool use and social learning,
consistent with the socio-ecological nature of the extrac-
tive foraging hypothesis.
Their Principal Components Analysis of these measures
revealed a single dominant component, gs1 that explains 65
percent of the variance in cognitive measures. As noted
above, three brain measures correlate signi ﬁcantly with
this measure. When they mapped this general cognitive
measure gs1, for primate species onto a phylogeny corrected
for independent contrasts it “… revealed multiple conver-
gent evolutionary events favoring high general intelligence
across primate lineages, with four independent responses
to selection in Cebus, Papio, Macaca , and Hominoidea ”
(Reader et al., 201 1,p. 1022). See Fig. 1 for a graphic depic-
tion of the phylogenetic relations of living primate genera
arrayed next to a bar graph of their g scores. The inde-
pendent distribution of the genera with the highest g
scores (see the darkest lines) re ﬂects the independent
(convergent) evolution of their cognitive abilities consis-
tent with the extractive foraging hypothesis.
The argument that extractive foraging in great apes is an
adaptation for exploiting high-energy embedded foods
during seasonal shortages is supported by Yamakoshi's
(1998) analysis of tool use in wild Bossou Guinea chim-
panzees. He found that during the mid-rainy season when
“easy-to-get” foods (i.e., fruits) were scarce, chimpanzees
turned to palm oil kernels and pith, “hard-to-get foods ”
they could only access through tool use.
(nut-cracking and pestle-pounding), They also
employed tools in ant-dipping, algae scooping and leaf
sponging. Year round average time tool using was 12%
compared with 32% in peak scarcity. Yamakoshi's (2001)
literature survey of tool use in feeding in 14 chimpanzee
populations reveals 54 cases virtually all of which involve
extraction of embedded foods.
Support for the argument that intelligent tool use is a
shared derived trait that arose in the common ancestor of
great apes and humans comes from the discovery that, like
chimpanzees ( McGrew, 1992), wild orangutans engage in
intelligent tool use for extractive foraging (van Schaik et al.,
Table 3
Adapted from correlation of cognitive and socio-ecological measures across primate species, Table 3 Reader et al. (201 1 , p. 1019). Bold type marks highly
correlated items consistent with the extractive foraging hypothesis.
Rate: ExFor Innov SocLrn TacDec ToolU DietBre %Fruit SGSize
Rate of extractive foraging 1 0.60*** 0.65*** 0.54*** 0.74*** 0.42*** 0.13 0.05
Rate of innovation 1 0.55*** 0.51*** 0.56*** 0.18*** 0.08 0.12
Rate social learning 1 0.54*** 0.69*** 0.44*** 0.32*** 0.12
Rate of tactical deception 1 0.58*** 0.36*** 0.21 0.30**
Rate of tool use 1 0.28** 0.24 /C0 0.05
Dietary breadth 1 0.40*** 0.25*
% Fruit in diet 1 0.14
Social group size 1
*p < 0.025, ** p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001.
S.T. Parker / New Ideas in Psychology 37 (2015) 1 e128

PDF PAGE 9
1996; Yamakoshi, 2004 ). Likewise, at least one group of
wild gorillas uses tools ( Breuer, Ndoundou-Hockemba, &
Fishlock, 2005). All great apes engage in intelligent tool use
in captivity ( Boysen, Kuhlmeier, Halliday, & Halliday, 1999;
Visalberghi, Fragaszy, & Savage Rumbaugh, 1995 ). Recent
analysis of molar morphology in dental fossils suggests that
great apes turned to omnivorous hard-object frugivory in
late Miocene: “on the basis of the present evidence, a role
for extractive foraging in the evidence of great ape intelli-
gence is highly plausible ” (Singleton, 2004 ; p. 312).
6. Summary and conclusions
The extractive foraging hypothesis was laid out in
several publications, none of which used extractive
foraging in the title (Section 3), rendering searches for the
ideas dif ﬁcult. Following Dunbar's reported discon ﬁrma-
tion, some investigators dismissed the hypothesis out of
hand. Field studies have rarely quanti ﬁed extractive
foraging. (See Sayers (2008) for a methodology for studying
extractive foraging in wild monkeys.).
Most critical, inability to quantify extractive foraging for
statistical testing ( Deaner et al., 2000; Dunbar, 1992; 1998 )
left Dunbar's claim against the extractive foraging hy-
pothesis unchallenged. Now Reader et al. (201 1) have
provided a methodology for testing the extractive foraging
hypothesis, the frugivorous, and the social group size hy-
potheses from published descriptions of primate socio-
ecology (Section 5.2). Their general cognitive measure g s1
includes extractive foraging, innovation, tool use, social
learning, and tactical deception, but not group size (see
Table 3 ). Consistent with the apprenticeship model of
extractive foraging, they conclude “… that ecologically
relevant cognitive abilities, from multiple domains, have
coevolved in primates, revealing an across-species general
intelligence, with general rather than purely social intelli-
gence probably driving brain evolution” (Reader et al., 201 1,
p.1022).
Reader et al. (201 1) show that extractive foraging is a
central element of primate cognition and brain size. Their
phylogenetic analysis shows that intelligence arose inde-
pendently in great apes, cebus monkeys, baboons, and ma-
caques. The data underpinning their g factor support the
hypothesis that the cognitive abilities expressed in tool use,
social learning, and innovation arose as adaptations for
extractive foraging on a variety of embedded food sources,
and for apprenticeship in these activities. This hypothesis has
the advantage of specifying which cognitive abilities were
favored by natural selection in which contexts and why.
Contrary to Dunbar's conclusion, social group size in
primates does not correlate with or explain their enlarged
brains or intelligence (Section 2.1; Section 3; Section 5) and
the extractive foraging hypothesis has been conﬁrmed. This
socio-ecological hypothesis is supported by a variety of
discoveries: 1) tool use in wild orangutans and gorillas
(Section 3) support the idea that extractive foraging arose
in the common ancestor of the great apes; dental
morphology in Miocene ape fossils also supports this idea
(Section 3); 2) imitation and self awareness in the great
apes, and teaching of tool use in wild chimpanzees sup-
ports the argument that these social abilities arose as an
Fig. 1. Phylogenetic distribution of general intelligence (g s1) in primates: (a)
gs1 scores for apes, Old World monkeys, New World monkeys, and pro-
simians; (b) g s1 scores mapped onto a composite primate tree showing
convergent high intelligence in Hominoidea, Macaca, Cebus, and Papio (c)
photographs illustrating behavioral ﬂexibility in Cebus nut cracking (Copy-
right © L Candisian/Minden pictures), Macaca food washing, Papio ﬁshing
(Copyright © iStockphoto.com/R.Bursch), Pan handclasp grooming (Copy-
right © M. Nakamura). Taken from Fig. 1, p. 1020, S. M. Reader et al. (201 1)
The evolution of primate general and cultural intelligence, Philosophical
Transaction of the Royal Society B.
S.T. Parker / New Ideas in Psychology 37 (2015) 1 e12 9

PDF PAGE 10
adaptation for apprenticeship in extractive foraging skills
(Section 3) (Tool use and prolonged development of
foraging in wild cebus monkeys supports the idea that
these arose in conjunction with extractive foraging (Section
3.1); 3) parallel evolution of cortical areas involved in
planning and manual coordination of object manipulation
in macaques and cebus monkeys (Section 3.2) supports the
idea that these two species independently evolved cogni-
tive abilities in conjunction with extractive foraging; 4) the
strong correlation among extractive foraging, tool use, and
social learning (Section 5.1) supports the idea that extrac-
tive foraging was the key selection pressure for primate
intelligence; 5) both absolute and proportional measures of
brain size are consistent with the correlation between
enlarged brains and extractive foraging (Section 5.1); 6)
discovery of worked stone tools with cracked marrow
bones is association with australopithecines 2.5 million
years ago supports the idea that early hominid subsistence
activities extended and elaborated extractive foraging.
As indicated above, the extractive foraging hypothesis has
been discounted for several reasons: First, the information-
processing bent of psychology has resulted in a resistance
to Piagetian concepts underpinning the extractive foraging
hypothesis (Section 4). Second, failure to distinguish be-
tween intelligent tool use and context-speciﬁc tool use, and
between extractive foraging with tools, proto-tools, and
anatomical manipulators (Section 3.2). has led to confusion
about the evolutionary relationships among extractive
foraging, tool use and intelligence. Third, the tendency to
dichotomize social and ecological intelligence (Section 2.1;
Section 3.1) has discouraged investigation of the relationship
between the two. Finally, unfamiliarity with concepts of
phylogeny, convergent evolution and heterochrony has led
to misconceptions. One result has been confusion about
reconstructing the evolution of character traits. Another has
been the expectation that cebus should show identical abil-
ities to chimpanzees rather than focal similarities typical of
convergent evolution (Section 3; Section 3.1; 2.2.3.). Still
another cause has been resistance to reconstructing the
evolution of cognitive development when it suggests reca-
pitulation of phylogeny during ontogeny (2.2.2.).
Acknowledgments
I thank the following people for their helpful sugges-
tions and comments on earlier drafts of this paper: Karin E.
Jaffe, Kathleen Gibson, Carol MacLeod, Constance Milbrath,
Bob Mitchell, Nathan Rank, and Andrew Wilson. I am also
grateful to Marina Cords for helpful criticisms, especially to
Eric Amsel for his editorial guidance. Needless to say, they
are not responsible for any errors in this article.
References
Allen, W. F., & Bickhard, M. H. (2013). Stepping off the Pendulum: why
only an action-based approach can transcend the nativist-empiricist
debate. Cognitive Development, 28 ,9 6 e133.
Antinucci, F. (1989). Cognitive structure and development in nonhuman
primates. Hillsdale, N J: Erlbaum .
Antinucci, F., Spinozzi, G., Visalberghi, E., & Volterra, V. (1982). Cognitive
development in a Japanese macaque ( Macaca fuscata ). Ann Ist Super
Sanita, 18 (2), 177 e184. www.arkive.org/aye-aye/daubentonia-
madagascaraensis.
Asfaw, B., White, T., Lovejoy, O., Latimer, B., Simpson, B., & Suwa, G. (1999).
Australopithecus garhi: a new species of early hominid from Ethiopia.
Science, 284 , 629 e635.
Barth, J., & Call, J. (2006). Tracking the displacement of objects: a series of
tasks with great apes ( Pan troglodyes, Pan paniscus, Gorilla gorilla and
Pongo pygmaeus ) and young children. Journal of Experimental Psy-
chology: Animal Behavior Processes, 32 (3), 239 e252.
Barton, R. A. (2006). Primate brain evolution: Integrating comparative,
neuro-physiological, and ethological data. Evolutionary Anthropology,
15, 224 e236.
Beck, B. B. (1980). Animal tool behavior: The manufacture and use of tools by
animals. New York. Garland .
Boesch, C. (1991). Teaching among wild chimpanzees. Animal Behaviour,
41, 530 e532.
Boesch, C., & Boesch-Acherman, H. (2000). The chimpanzees of the Tai
forest. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press .
Boysen, S., Kuhlmeier, V., Halliday, P., & Halliday, Y. (1999). Tool use in
captive gorillas. In S. T. Parker, R. W. Mitchell, & H. L. Miles (Eds.), The
mentality gorillas and orangutans (pp. 179 e182). Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press .
Breuer, T., Ndoundou-Hockemba, M., & Fishlock, V. (2005). First obser-
vation of tool use in wild gorillas. PLOS Biology, 3 (1 1 1), 2041e2043.
Byrne, R., & Whiten, A. (Eds.). (1988). Machiavellian intelligence . London:
Oxford University Press .
Case, R. (1985). Intellectual development from birth to adulthood . Orlando,
FL: Academic Press .
Case, R. (1987). Neo-piagetian theory: retrospect and prospect. Interna-
tional Journal of Psychology, 22 ,7 7 3e791.
Cheney, D., & Seyfarth, R. (1990). How monkeys see the world . Chicago:
University of Chicago Press .
Chevalier-Skolnikoff, S. (1977). A Piagetian model for comparing the so-
cialization of monkey, ape, and human infants. In S. Chevalier-Skol-
nikoff, & F. Poirier (Eds.), Primate biosocial development (pp. 159e188).
New York, Garland .
Chevalier-Skolnikoff, S. (1983). Sensorimotor development in orangutans
and other primates. Journal of Human Evolution, 12 , 545 e561.
Damon, W., & Hart, D. (1988). Self understanding in childhood and
adolescence. New York: Cambridge University Press .
Deaner, R., Isler, K., Burkart, J., & van Schaik, C. (2007). Overall brain size,
and not encephalization quotient, best predicts cognitive ability
across non-human primates. Brain, Behavior and Evolution, 70 (2),
115e124.
Deaner, R., Nunn, C., & van Schaik, C. (2000). Comparative tests of primate
cognition: different scaling methods produce different results. Brain,
Behavior and Evolution, 55 (1), 44 e52.
Deaner, R., van Schaik, C., & Johnson, V. (2006). Do some taxa have better
domain general cognition than others? A meta-analysis of nonhuman
primate studies. Evolutionary Psychology, 4 ,1 4 9e196.
Dore, F. Y., & Dumas, C. (1987). Psychology of animal cognition: Piagetian
studies. Psychological Bulletin, 102 (2), 219e233.
Dunbar, R. I. M. (1992). Neocortex size as a constraint on group size in
primates. Journal of Human Evolution, 20 , 409 e493.
Dunbar, R. I. M. (1993). Coevolution of neocortical size, group size and
language in humans. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 16 , 681 e735.
Dunbar, R. I. M. (1998). The social brain hypothesis. Evolutionary An-
thropology, 6(5), 178e190.
Falk, D. (2007). Evolution of the primate brain. In W. Henke, & I. Tattersall
(Eds.), Handbook of paleoanthropology (pp. 1 133e1362). New York:
Springer Verlag, 2: Primate evolution and human origins .
Felsenstein, J. (1985). Phylogenies and the comparative method. American
Naturalist, 125,1 e15.
Flavell, J. H., Botkin, P. T., Fry, C. L., Wright, J. W., & Jarvis, P. E. (1968). The
development of role-taking and communication skills in children .N e w
York: Wiley.
Fleagle, J. G. (1999). Primate adaptation and evolution . New York: Aca-
demic Press .
Fox, E., & van Schaik, C. (1999). Intelligent tool use in wild Sumatran
orangutans. In S. T. Parker, H. L. Miles, & R. W. Mitchell (Eds.), The
mentality of gorillas and orangutans (pp. 99 e1 16). Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press .
Fragaszy, D. (1990). Early behavioral development in capuchins ( Cebus). In
D. Fragaszy, J. Robinson, & E. Visalberghi (Eds.), Adaptation and
adaptability of capuchin monkeys (pp. 1 19e128). Basel: Karger .
Fragaszy, D. (1998). How nonhuman primates use their hands. In
K. J. Connolly (Ed.), Psychology of the hand (pp. 77 e96). New York:
Cambridge University Press .
S.T. Parker / New Ideas in Psychology 37 (2015) 1 e1210

PDF PAGE 11
Fragaszy, D., Izar, P., Visalberghi, E., Ottoni, E. B., & Gomez de Oliveira, M.
(2004). Wild capuchin monkeys ( Cebus libidinosus ) use anvils and
stone pounding tools. American Journal of Primatology, 64(4), 359e366.
Gibson, K. R. (1986). Cognition, brain size and the extraction of embedded
food resources. In J. G. Else, & P. Lee (Eds.), Primate ontogeny, cognition
and social behaviour (pp. 93 e104). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press .
Gibson, K. R., & Jesse, S. (1999). Language evolution and expansions of
multiple neurological processing areas. In B. King (Ed.), The origins of
language, what nonhuman primates can tell us (pp. 189e227). Santa Fe:
School of American Research Press .
Gibson, K. R., Rumbaugh, D., & Beran, M. (2001). Bigger is better: primate
brain size in relation to cognition. In D. Falk, & K. R. Gibson (Eds.),
Evolutionary anatomy of the primate cerebral cortex (pp. 79 e97).
Cambridge UK: Cambridge University Press .
Gomez, J.-C. (2005). Species comparative studies and cognitive develop-
ment. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 9 (3), 1 18e125.
Hallock, M. B., & Worobey, J. (1984). Cognitive development in infant
chimpanzees. Journal of Human Evolution, 13 ,4 4 1e447.
Humphrey, N. K. (1976). The social function of intellect. In P. G. Bateson, &
R. A. Hinde (Eds.), Growing points in ethology (pp. 303 e317). Cam-
bridge, UK: Cambridge University Press .
Inhelder, B., & Piaget, J. (1958). The growth of logical thinking from child-
hood to adolescence . New York: Basic Books .
Inhelder, B., & Piaget, J. (1964). The early growth of logical thinking .N e w
York: Routledge, Kegan Paul .
Isler, K., Kirk, E. C., & Miller, J. M. A. (2008). Endocranial volumes of pri-
mate species: scaling analysis using a comprehensive and reliable
data set. Journal of Human Evolution, 55 , 967 e978.
Jerison, H. (1973). Evolution of brain and intelligence . New York: Academic
Press.
Jolly, A. (1964). Prosimians' manipulation of simple object problems.
Animal Behaviour, 12 , 560 e571.
Jolly, A. (1972). The evolution of primate behavior . New York: MacMillian .
Kaufman, J. A., Ahrens, E., Laidlaw, D., Zhang, S., & Ahman, J. (2006).
Anatomical analysis of an Aye-Aye brain (Daubentonia madagascar-
iensis, Primates: Prosimii) combining histology, structural magnetic
resonance imaging and diffusion tensor imaging. Anatomical Record
Part A, 287A , 1026e1037.
Kohlberg, L. (1969). Stage and sequence: the cognitive-developmental
approach to socialization. In D. A. Goslin (Ed.), Handbook of socializ-
ation theory and research . New York: Rand McNally .
Krubitzer, L., & Disbrow, E. (2010). The evolution of parietal areas involved
in hand use in primates. In F. Dolins, & R. W. Mitchell (Eds.), Spatial
cognition, spatial perception (pp. 365 e421). New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Langer, J. (1980). The origins of logic: Six to twelve months . New York:
Academic Press .
Langer, J. (1986). The origins of logic: One to two years . New York: Aca-
demic Press .
Langer, J. (1996). Heterochrony and the evolution of primate cognitive
development. In A. E. Russon, K. Bard, & S. T. Parker (Eds.), Reaching
into thought: The minds of great apes (pp. 257e277). ) Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press .
Lefebvre, L., Nicolakis, N., & Boie, D. (2002). Tools and brains in birds.
Behaviour, 139, 939 e973.
Lewis, M., & Brooks-Gunn, J. (1979). Social cognition and the acquisition of
self. New York: Plenum .
MacLeod, C. K. (2004). What is in a brain? The question of a distinctive
brain-anatomy in great apes. In A. E. Russon, & D. R. Begun (Eds.), The
evolution of thought: Evolutionary origins of great ape intelligence (pp.
105e121). Cambridge UK: Cambridge University Press .
MacLeod, C. K., Zilles, K., Schleicher, A., Rilling, J. R., & Gibson, K. R. (2003).
Expansion of the neocerebellum in Hominoidea. Journal of Human
Evolution, 44 ,4 0 1e429.
Martin, R. D., & Harvey, P. H. (1985). Brain size allometry ontogeny and
phylogeny. In W. L. Jungers (Ed.), Size and scaling in primate biology
(pp. 147e174). ) NY: Plenum Press .
Mathieu, M., Daudelin, N., Dagenais, Y., & Decaire, T. (1980). Piagetian
causality in two house-reared chimpanzees ( Pan troglodytes ). Cana-
dian Journal of Psychology, 34 (2), 179e186.
Matsuzawa, T., & Yamakoshi, G. (1996). Comparison of material culture
between Bossou and Nimba. In A. E. Russon, K. Bard, & S. T. Parker
(Eds.), Reaching into Thought: The minds of great apes (pp. 21 1e232).
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press .
McGrew, W. (1992). Chimpanzee material culture: Implications for human
evolution. New York: Cambridge University Press .
McKinney, M., & McNamara, K. (1991). Heterochrony: The Evolution of
Ontogeny. New York: Plenum .
Mendes, N., & Huber, L. (2004). Object permanence in common marmo-
sets (Callithrix jacchus) . Journal of Comparative Psychology, 1 18 (1),
103e112.
Milton, K. (1988). Foraging behaviour and the evolution of primate in-
telligence. In R. Byrne, & A. Whiten (Eds.), Machiavellian intelligence
(pp. 285 e305). Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press .
Müller, U., & Overton, W. F. (1998). How to grow a baby: a re-evaluation of
image-schema and Piagetian action approaches to representation.
Human Development, 41 ,7 1 e111.
Napier, J. (1993). Hands. Princeton: Princeton University Press .
Padberg, J., Franca, J. G., Cooke, D. F., Soares, J. G. M., Rosa, M. G. P.,
Fiorani, M., Jr., et al. (2007). Parallel evolution of cortical areas
involved in skilled hand use. Journal of Neuroscience, 27 (38),
10106e10115.
Parker, C. E. (1974). Behavioral diversity in ten species of nonhuman
primates. Journal of Comparative and Physiological Psychology, 87 (5),
930e937.
Parker, S. T. (1977). Piaget's sensorimotor series in an infant macaque: a
model for comparing unstereotyped behavior and intelligence in
human and nonhuman primates. In S. Chevalier-Skolnikoff, &
F. Poirier (Eds.), Primate biosocial development (pp. 43 e1 12). New
York, Garland.
Parker, S. T. (1990). The origins of comparative developmental evolu-
tionary studies of primate mental abilities. In S. T. Parker, &
K. R. Gibson (Eds.), “Language” and intelligence in monkeys and apes
(pp. 3 e64). New York: Cambridge University Press .
Parker, S. T. (1996). Apprenticeship in tool-mediated extractive foraging:
the origins of imitation, teaching, and self-awareness in great apes. In
A. E. Russon, K. Bard, & S. T. Parker (Eds.), Reaching into thought: The
minds of great apes (pp. 348 e370). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press .
Parker, S. T., & Gibson, K. R. (1977). Object manipulation, tool use, and
sensorimotor intelligence as feeding adaptations in cebus monkeys
and great apes. Journal of Human Evolution, 6 , 623 e641.
Parker, S. T., & Gibson, K. R. (1979). A developmental model for the evo-
lution of language and intelligence in early hominids. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences, 2 ,3 6 7e408.
Parker, S. T., & Jaffe, K. E. (2008). Darwin's legacy: Scenarios in human
evolution. Lanham, MD: Alta Mira Press .
Parker, S. T., & McKinney, M. L. (1999). The origins of intelligence: The
evolution of cognitive development in monkeys, apes, and humans .
Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press .
Pepperberg, I. (1992). The value of the Piagetian framework for compar-
ative cognitive studies. Animal Cognition, 5 ,1 7 7e182.
Perner, J. (1991). Understanding the representational mind . Boston: MIT
Press.
Perry, S., & Manson, J. (2008). Manipulative monkeys . Cambridge MA:
Harvard University Press .
Phillips, K. (1998). Tool use in wild capuchin monkeys ( Cebus albifrons
trinitatis). American Journal of Primatology, 46 , 259 e261.
Phillips, K. (2008), July 9. Big brains arose twice in higher primates.
Eukeraalert!.org.
Piaget, J. (1954). The construction of reality in the child . New York: Basic
Books.
Piaget, J. (1962). Play, dreams, and imitation . New York: W W Norton .
Piaget, J. (1965). The moral judgment of the child . New York: Free Press .
Piaget, J. (1974). The child's construction of quantities . New York: Rout-
ledge, Kegan Paul .
Piaget, J. (1985). The equilibration of cognitive structures, the central prob-
lem of intellectual development . T. Brown & K. J. Thampy, translator.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press .
Piaget, J. (1952). The origins of intelligence in children . New York: Inter-
national Universities Press .
Piaget, J., & Inhelder, B. (1967). The child's conception of space . New York:
W/W. Norton.
Piaget, J., & Inhelder, B. (1969). The psychology of the child . New York: Basic
Books.
Reader, S. M., Hager, Y., & Laland, K. (201 1). The evolution of primate
general and cultural intelligence. Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society B, 366 ,1 0 1 7e1027.
Reader, S. M., & Laland, K. N. (2002). Social intelligence, innovation, and
enhanced brain size in primates. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences, 99 (7), 4436 e4441.
Redshaw, M. (1978). Cognitive development in human and gorilla infants.
Journal of Human Evolution, 7 ,1 1 3e141.
S.T. Parker / New Ideas in Psychology 37 (2015) 1 e12 11

PDF PAGE 12
Rilling, J. K. (2006). Human and nonhuman brains: are they allometrically
scaled versions of the same design? Evolutionary Anthropology, 15 ,
66e77.
Roma, P., Silberberg, G. A., Huntsberry, A. M., Christensen, C. J.,
Ruggiero, A., & Suomi, S. (2007). Mark tests for mirror self-recognition
in capuchin monkeys ( Cebus apella) trained to touch marks. American
Journal of Primatology, 69 (9), 989 e1 000.
Russon, A. E. (2004). Evolutionary constructions of great ape intelligence.
In A. E. Russon, & D. R. Begun (Eds.), The evolution of thought: Evolu-
tionary origins of great ape intelligence (pp. 1 e14). Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press .
Russon, A. E., & Bard, K. (1996). Exploring the minds of great apes: Issues
and controversies. In A. E. Russon, K. Bard, & S. T. Parker (Eds.),
Reaching into thought: The minds of great apes (pp. 1e20). Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge University Press .
Sayers, K. A. (2008). Optimal foraging on the roof of the world: A ﬁeld study
of Himalayan langurs . Anthropology. Cleveland Kent State University.
PhD dissertation: 240 .
van Schaik, C., Deaner, R. O., & Merrill, M. Y. (1999). The context for tool
use in primates: implications for the evolution of material culture.
Journal of Human Evolution, 36 ,7 1 9e741.
van Schaik, C., Fox, E., & Sitompul, A. F. (1996). Manufacture and use of
tools in wild Sumatran orangutans: implications for human evolution.
Naturwissenschaften, 83 ,1 8 6e188.
Singleton, M. (2004). Fossil hominoid diets, extractive foraging, and the
origins of great ape intelligence. In A. E. Russon, & D. R. Begun (Eds.),
The evolution of thought: Evolutionary origins of great ape intelligence
(pp. 298 e319). Cambridge UK: Cambridge University Press .
Stephan, H., Frahm, H., & Baron, G. (1981). New and revised data on
volumes of brain structure in insectivores and primates. Folia Pri-
matologica, 35 ,1 e29.
Sterling, E., & Povinelli, D. (1999). Tool use, aye-ayes, and sensorimotor
intelligence. Folia Primatologica, 70 ,8 e16.
Tomasello, M., & Call, J. (1997). Primate cognition . New York: Oxford
University Press.
Torigoe, T. (1985). Comparison of object manipulation among 74 species
of non-human primates. Primates, 26 (2), 182e194.
Uzgiris, I., & Hunt, M. (1975). Assessment in infancy: Ordinal scales of
psychological development. Urbana: University of Illinois Press .
Vauclair, J. (1996). Animal cognition . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Visalberghi, E., Fragaszy, D., & Savage Rumbaugh, S. (1995). Performance
in a tool -using task by common chimpanzees ( Pan troglodytes ),
bonobos ( Pan paniscus ), and orangutan ( Pongo pygmeaus ), and
capuchin monkeys ( Cebus apella ). Journal of Comparative Psychology,
109(1), 52 e60.
Visalberghi, E., & Limongelli, L. (1994). Lack of comprehension of cause-
effect relations in tool-using capuchin monkeys ( Cebus apella ). Jour-
nal of Comparative Psychology, 108 (1), 15e22.
Waga, I. C., Dacier, A. K., Pinha, P. S., & Tavares, M. C. (2006). Spontaneous
tool use by wild capuchin monkeys ( Cebus libidinosus) in the Cerrado.
Folia Primatologica, 77 (5), 337e344.
Watson, M. W., & Fischer, K. W. (1980). Development of social roles in
elicited and spontaneous behavior during preschool years. Develop-
mental Psychology, 16(5), 483 e494.
Whiten, A. (2000). Primate culture and social learning. Cognitive Science,
24(3), 477e508.
Wynn, T. (1979). The intelligence of later Acheulian hominids. Man, 14,
171e191.
Yamakoshi, G. (1998). Dietary responses to fruit scarcity of wild chim-
panzees at Bossou, Guinea: possible implications for ecological
importance of tool use. American Journal of Physical Anthropology, 106 ,
283e295.
Yamakoshi, G. (2001). Ecology of tool use in wild chimpanzees: toward
reconstruction of early hominid evolution. In T. Matsuzawa (Ed.),
Primate origins of human cognition and behavior (pp. 537e556). Tokyo:
Springer Verlag .
Yamakoshi, G. (2004). Evolution of complex feeding techniques in pri-
mates: is this the origin of great ape intelligence? In A. E. Russon, &
D. R. Begun (Eds.), The evolution of thought: Evolutionary origins of
great ape intelligence (pp. 140e171) Cambridge UK: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press .
S.T. Parker / New Ideas in Psychology 37 (2015) 1 e1212