PDF PAGE 1
I 
This dissertation has been •*• , 
microfilmed exactly as received ~ ' 
OPPENHEIMER, John Reed, 1941-
BEHAVIOR AND ECOLOGY OF THE WHITE-FACED 
MONKEY, CEBUS CAPUCINUS, ON BARRO 
COLORADO JSLAND, C. Z. 
University of Illinois, Ph.D., 1968 
Zoology 
University Microfilms, Inc., Ann Arbor, Michigan 

PDF PAGE 2
BEHAVIOR AND ECOLOGY OF THE WHITE-FACED MONKEY, 
CEBUS CAPUCINVS, ON BARRO COLORADO ISLAND, C. Z. 
BY 
JOHN REED OPPENHEIMER 
B.A., University of Connecticut, 1963 
M.S., University of Illinois, 1965 
THESIS 
Submitted in partial fulfillment of the requirements 
for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy in Zoology 
in the Graduate College of the 
University of Illinois, 1968 
Urbana, Illinois 

PDF PAGE 3
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS 
THE GRADUATE COLLEGE 
May 27, 1968 
I HEREBY RECOMMEND THAT THE THESIS PREPARED UNDER MY 
SUPERVISION BY_ John Reed Oppenheimer 
TT.NTTTT.-RD Behavior and Ecology of the White-faced Monkey, Ceous 
capuolnus, on Barro Colorado Island, C. Z. 
BE ACCEPTED IN PARTIAL FULFILLMENT OF THE REQUIREMENTS FOR 
THE DEGREE OF_ Doctor of Philosophy 
/5£fc*flt V i£uJ& /? //_^=^ In Ch: In Charge of Thesis 
•tn*^-g*^*i*^ 
Head of Department 
Recommendation concurred inf 
Committee 
on 
Final Examination! 
t Required':for doctors-degree but not for master's. 
D517 

PDF PAGE 4
iii 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
I wish to thank the many scientists and others, who 
during their stays on Barro Colorado Island or at other times 
gave me assistance in identification of plant and animal 
material, and in other ways. Specifically, I would like to 
thank the following people: C. J. Bottimer, Crowly, Texas; 
J. A. Duke, Interoceanic Canal Studies, Battelle Memorial 
Institute, Balboa Heights, C.Z.; C. 0, Handley, Jr., U.S. 
National Museum; A. and M, Hladik, Museum National D'Histoire 
Naturelle, Brunoy, France; P. B. Kannowski, Dept. Biology, 
Univ. of North Dakota; W. H. Lewis, Director of the Herbarium, 
Missouri Botanical Garden, St. Louis, and staff; M. Naumann, 
Dept. Entomology, Univ. of Kansas; N. Smythe, Dept. of Zoology, 
Univ. of Maryland; and most particularly, T. B. Croat- of the 
Missouri Botanical Garden. 
I am grateful to C. 0. Handley, Jr., J. C. Moore, and 
R. G. Van Gelder, Curators of Mammals at respectively, the 
U.S. National Museum, the Chicago Field Museum of Natural 
History, and The American Museum of Natural History, for their 
permission to study their specimens of Cebus. Hospitality 
was graciously offered to me by various people and groups, 
but I would like to thank very much Dr. and Mrs. S. Altmann; 
the survey camp staff at Santa Fe, Darien, R. P., of the 
Interoceanio Canal Study; the Chiriqui Land Company, Puerto 
Armuelles, R. P.; and very especially, Martin H. Moynihan, 

PDF PAGE 5
iv 
and his staff at the Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute, 
Balboa, Canal Zone. 
Dr. Martin H. Moynihan was very helpful before, during 
and after this research was done on Barro Colorado Island, 
and to him I owe deep appreciation. Dr. Edwin M. Banks, my 
advisor, has shown great patience and understanding both 
during our long distance communications and during our per­
sonal discussions, and I am most grateful to him for his help 
and criticisms. Lastly, I would like to thank my wife who— • 
has helped greatly in turning a mass of field notes into what 
I hope is something more understandable. 
This research was supported, in part, by a Predoctoral 
Internship from the Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C, 
and by some equipment funds from the Department of Zoology, 
the University of Illinois, Urbana. Spectrographic analysis 
of the vocalisations was supported by grants to Drs. E. M. 
Banks (N.S.F. GB4996) and M. Salmon. 

PDF PAGE 6
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
v 
Page 
INTRODUCTION ..A 1 
METHODS 7 
ECOLOGY 11 
Habitat of Cebus 11 
Sources of Water ., 12 
The Diet of Cebus and Their Interaction 
with the Environment ..., 12 
Territories 22 
Fluctuations in Fruit Production Within 
and Between Territories 25 
INDIVIDUAL STATUS AND GROUP ORGANIZATION 27 
Age and Sex Classes 27 
Reproductive Maturity and 
Genital Morphology 29 
Forehead Patterns and Other Variations 30 
Group Size, Structure and Dynamics 33 
GENERAL BEHAVIOR 42 
Locomotion , 42 
Resting and Sleeping Positions 45 
Feeding and Drinking Behavior 50 
Body Care and Elimination of Wastes 56 
Daily Activity 66 
BODY GESTURES, FACIAL EXPRESSIONS, AND 
VOCALIZATIONS 74 
Body Gestures and Tactile Stimulation 74 
Facial Expressions 92 
Vocalizations , 98 
PATTERNS OF SOCIAL BEHAVIOR 112 
Sexual Behavior 112 
Play Behavior 113 
Allogrooming , 116 
Intragroup Agonistic Behavior ,. 119 
Territorial Behavior ' \ 122 

PDF PAGE 7
vi 
TABLE OF CONTENTS (continued) 
Page 
INTERSPECIFIC BEHAVIOR 125 
Interaction with Predators and Man 125 
Relations with Ateles 127 
Relations with Alouatta 129 
Relations with Nasua . 7., 130 
Relations with Other Mammals 131 
Relations with Other Animals 131 
DISCUSSION 133 
SUMMARY 147 
APPENDIX 151 
LITERATURE CITED 174 
VITA 180 

PDF PAGE 8
vii 
LIST OF FIGURES 
Figure Page 
1. Map of Barro Colorado Island 5 
2. Territories of Cebus capucinus 23 
3. Cebus capucinus forehead patterns 31 
4. A, Adult jumping from palm frond to tree with 
out-stretched arms. 
B. Adult looking back at juvenile hidden 
in leaves. 
C. Adult holds up palm frond while juvenile 
walks across and up her back 46 
5. Three members of group A at rest 48 
6. Chapman, old male of group G, sitting 
and watching 49 
7. A three year old male feeding from a balsa 
flower 51 
8. Two juveniles of group C feeding on some part 
of a yellow epiphytic bromeliad 52 
9. Ocean, adult female of group A, breaking open 
Mabea with teeth to get at seed 53 
10. A Cebus, holding on with its tail, pulls fruit 
off of Scheelea palm to eat 54 
11. Foot of infant Cebus showing greater length of 
nail on second toe, low right, as compared to 
nails of third, fourth and fifth toes, above 59 
12. Adult male, Spot, at left and juvenile male, 
Serrate, inspecting their own hands 60 
13. Pug, the active old male of group B in 
threat posture 77 
14. One adult female grooming another 83 
15. Old male of group B in partial "assistance" 
position, right arm placed across the back of 
adult female, while both threaten observer 86 

PDF PAGE 9
viii 
LIST OF FIGURES (continued) 
Figure .«- Page 
16. Old male, Pug, of group B,in full "assistance" 
position, with chest against the back of 
juvenile, and left arm pressing against 
juvenile's left side, while juvenile threatens 
observer 87 
17. Natasha riding across the shoulders of her 
mother, 3 Fingers, at one day of age 89 
18. Natasha riding parallel on her mother's back 
at 53 days of age 90 
19- Juvenile female grooming adult male intently .... 94 
20. Play 97 
21. Vocalizations of Cebus capucinus 100 
22. Juvenile, left, being groomed by Ocean, center, 
and Ocean being groomed by 3 Fingers 118 
23. Contact and group spacing calls of different 
species 136 

PDF PAGE 10
1 
INTRODUCTION 
The first major primate field study was done on a New 
World primate, Alouatta, by C. R. Carpenter (1934). After 
this, Carpenter switched his studies to the Old World primates 
on which most of the studies of the last 10 to 15 years have 
been carried out. More recently, however, there has been a 
renewed interest in the monkeys of the New World (Table 1). 
A series of short follow-up studies were made on the popula­
tion of howler monkeys, which Carpenter had studied on Barro 
Colorado Island (Altmann, 1959; Bernstein, 1964a; and Collias 
and Southwick, 1952). Moynihan has initiated a long-term 
program on the platyrrhines, starting with Aotus (1964) and 
Callicebus (1966), and Eisenberg and Kuehn (1966) have recently 
focused attention on the spider monkey, At.eles geoffroyi. 
From the late l800's up through the I960's various people 
have traveled through Central and South America, and have 
observed Cebus (see Hill, i960). Kuhlhorn (1939) made some 
brief observations of _C. apella, while he collected specimens 
for a museum. He reported information on group size and 
structure,-size of group ranges, and on vocalizations. 
Several people have observed _C. capucinus briefly on Barro 
Colorado Island (Altmann, 1959; Bernstein, 1964a; Carpenter, 
1934; Chapman, 1929, 1937, 1938; Collias and Southwick, 1952; 
and Enders, 1935), and elsewhere in Panama (Aldrich and Bole, 
1937). 

PDF PAGE 11
2 
Table 1. Classification of Living Primates with Reference 
to the Genus Cebus (Modified from: Campbell, 1966; 
Hershkovitz, 1949; and Walker, 1964). 
Order: Primates 
Suborder: Prosimii 
Suborder: Anthropoidea 
New World - Platyrrhines 
Superfamily: Ceboidea 
Family: Callithricidae 
Callithrix 
Cebuella 
Saguinus 
Leontideus " 
Family: Cebidae 
Callimico 
Aotus 
Callicebus 
Cacajao 
Pithecia 
Chiropotes 
Alouatta 
Cebus afbifrons 
capucinus capucinus 
curtus 
nigripectus 
imitator" 
limitaneus 
Old World - Catarrhines 
Superfamily: Cercopithecoidea 
Family: Cercopithecidae 
Superfamily: Hominoidea 
Family: "Pongidae 
Family: Hominidae 
nigrivittatus 
apella 
Saimiri 
Ateles " 
Brachyteles 
Lagothrix 

PDF PAGE 12
3 
Several studies have been conducted on captive Cebus. 
Many aspects of the behavior of C. apella have been reported 
(Nolte, 1958), including data on the development of an infant 
from birth to one year of age (Nolte and DUcker, 1959). 
Manipulation of objects and use of objects as tools have been 
observed in a captive _C. apella (Vevers and Weiner, 1963). 
Certain aspects of learning behavior have been observed in 
C. capucinus (Kl'iiver, 1933, 1937) and in C. albifrons (Crawford, 
1962; Shell and Riopelle, 1958). Social interactions and 
dominance patterns have also been studied in _C. albifrons 
(Bernstein, 1965; Plotnik, King, and Roberts, 1966). 
Study of the New World primates affords the opportunity 
to compare their behavior and social organization with that 
of their ecological equivalents in the Old World, whose separ­
ate evolutionary development has been going on for about the 
same amount of time. Knowledge of Cebus should make it 
possible to enhance our understanding of both groups of 
primates. 
Cebus is a behaviorally flexible animal that seems able 
to rival the abilities of the Old World monkeys and apes (see 
Hill, i960, pp. 395-401). Superficially, Cebus is more 
reminiscent of the Old World Cercopithecidae, than are any 
of the other New World primates (Moynihan, 1966), and their 
existence demonstrates the close relationship between the 
smaller ceboids, and the larger, more specialized, genera, 
such as Ateles and Alouatta (Hill, i960, p. 324). 

PDF PAGE 13
4 
The genus extends southward from Honduras, through Central 
America, and inhabits much of the northern two-thirds of South 
America (Hill, i960, p. 405). Of the four species in the 
genus, Cebus capucinus is the northern most. It inhabites 
Central America and has scattered populations in northern 
Columbia and possibly Venezuela (Hershkovitz, 1949; Hill, 
i960, p. 426). One subspecies, C. capucinus imitator, is 
distributed throughout Panama, and a few members of the sub­
species became isolated on Barro Colorado Island, when the 
lowlands were flooded in 1914 to raise the water level for 
the Panama Canal, 
The island has been a protected biological preserve since 
1923, and is now under the supervision of the Smithsonian 
Tropical Research Institute. It is about 3 miles wide and 
3.5 miles long, and has an area of about 4000 acres. Farms 
were present until the mid-1920's on the northeastern side 
of the island. Thus there are patches of forest in this area 
which are very densely populated with saplings. Forest sur­
rounding these patches, and forest elsewhere on the island, 
rise to about 100 feet, with a few trees rising to 125 or 
130 feet. There is a system of marked trails which covers 
the island (Fig. 1). The climate is tropical, with a dry 
season from January to April, and a wet season, which gradually 
develops, from May to November. There are four other primate 
genera on the island besides Cebus: Alouatta, Aotus, Ateles, 
and Saquinus. Ateles geoffroyi has been introduced onto the 
island because it is being shot for food throughout its 

PDF PAGE 14
ptWi iu« 
HAf » 
MM) COUMADO ISLAND 
CANAL ZONE 
l 
tell U1 
Figure 1. Map of Barro Colorado Island. 

PDF PAGE 15
6 
range, and presently faces" extinction on the mainland. 
Cebus is also hunted throughout its range to provide food 
for the human population, and in some places for its pelt. 
Captured young are frequently sold on the market as pets. 
At the present time man probably presents the greatest danger 
to the species, due both to hunting, and to destruction of 
the habitat. 
The aim of this paper will be to present data obtained 
during the first long-term, systematic study of Cebus on Barro 
Colorado Island from March 1966 to August 1967. A comparison 
of the behavior of Cebus capucinus with that of other species 
of primates will also be presented. The term Cebus through­
out this paper will refer to _C. capucinus. 

PDF PAGE 16
7 
METHODS 
As in any field study the first problem is to locate 
the animals. On Barro Colorado Island this step is expedited 
by a system of trails that allows one to get to a particular 
area without trouble. The trails also provide a permanent 
grid for the location of groups and for the determination of 
a group's position during its daily movement. When a group 
was followed through an area without trails, its line of 
movement was estimated at the end of the day, with the use 
of a gross topographic map (Fig. 1), A compass was used to 
establish the direction of movement of a group when landmarks 
were absent. A group throughout this paper refers to a 
number of closely associated adult males, adult females, and 
young which can be seen together daily. 
When groups were initially located an effort was made 
to maintain contact with them for as long as possible that 
day. In the beginning of the study, the Cebus groups were 
able to evade me. But if their evasion tactics were pro­
longed, disrupting their resting and feeding activities, I 
broke contact with them. On some days it was possible to 
make contact with one or more groups, whereas at other times 
the whole day might be spent walking the trails, or searching 
within a group's territory, without making contacts. Usually 
when a group was near, it could be detected by the sounds 
of its movement through the trees, or by vocalizations. 
However, if the group was resting, or trying to avoid contact, 

PDF PAGE 17
8 
it was difficult to locate. One major problem with the 
white-faced capuchins is that they move rapidly through an 
area, and may cross the observer's line of travel just before 
or after he has passed, without his being aware of it. 
When discovered, a group was approached slowly in an 
effort to avoid disturbing the animals. For the first few 
months the Cebus usually reacted quickly to me, but after 
several months, one group usually ignored my presence. This 
group was fed sections of banana and bread during the height 
of the rainy season, October, November, and December, and to 
a lesser extent in the beginning of the dry season. This 
feeding was done at various times of the day while I followed 
the group, and it helped to make my presence more acceptable. 
I followed the monkeys through the forest, staying in a posi­
tion where I could observe them with binoculars (10 x 40) 
and where they could see me. After several months of field 
work I was able to recognize groups and individuals, and I 
assigned names to them: groups were given a letter code, 
A, B, C, D, etc., in the order that they were found; individ­
uals were given names that were usually associated with 
natural pelt markings specific to them. I was eventually 
able to follow a group from dawn until dusk. Observations 
were attempted at night, but Cebus remained quiet, and were 
blocked from view by the foliage. Lights and an infra-red 
sniper scope were used, but the monkeys were hidden from 
sight. 

PDF PAGE 18
9 
Some observations were made of caged animals that had 
been purchased from the markets in Panama City and Colon. 
During the day, notes were written of any fragments of 
behavior that could be observed. After several months, when 
the individual monkeys were known to me, a portable tape 
recorder (Uher 4000-Report L) was used in the field. Observa­
tions were dictated onto tape and vocalizations were recorded. 
Samples of the fruit, or other vegetation that the Cebus 
ate, or used in some other way, were collected. Some material 
was picked up off the ground after the monkeys had dropped it. 
Other material had to be removed from the trees in which the 
monkeys had been eating. To do this, a string with a weight 
on the end, was thrown over a branch, and the branch, or 
fruit with leaves was pulled down. Color slides were taken 
of the leaf and fruit samples at the laboratory and the samples 
were then pressed and dried. Fleshy fruits were preserved in 
alcohol. If the taxonomic family of the plant was known, I 
attempted to identify it but most of the plant material was 
identified by botanists during or after the study. When 
only the fruit or seeds were found, the seeds were planted 
in potting soil, and the seedlings that developed were identi­
fied. Usually when an insect was eaten, only this fact could 
be recorded unless the insect was recognized. Occasionally 
fragments were dropped, or were found in the fecal material, 
and at least a partial identification could be made. 
Certain aspects of behavior were recorded with cameras. 
A 35nim still camera and a l6mm movie camera were used. 

PDF PAGE 19
10 
Inside the forest Tri-X black and white film (35mm) was 
exposed at the normal 400 ASA, and at 1600 ASA with special 
development. Ansco 200/D and Kodak Ektachrome EF 724l 16mm 
color films were both used when bright sunlight filtered 
through the canopy. 
Horizontal and vertical distances were measured with a 
tape measure if the distances were 10 feet or less, and were 
measured with an optical rangefinder if the distances were 
greater. Stop watches and a hand counter were used during 
observations of wild and captive monkeys. 
Spectrographs analysis of the vocalizations was done 
on a Kay Missilizer. Two record frequency ranges were used 
for analysis (50-5,000 and 150-15,000 Hz). Sonagrams repre­
sentative of the vocalizations are presented below. 

PDF PAGE 20
11 
ECOLOGY 
Habitat of Cebus 
Cebus is an arboreal primate and can perform all its 
activities, feeding, moving, playing, sleeping, etc. in the 
trees. However, it is not limited to the area between 40 
and 100 feet above the ground as had been suggested (Allee, 
1926). Capuchins can be found in trees that rise above the 
main canopy to about 125 feet, particularly when these trees 
are in fruit. The time spent this high may be relatively 
small compared to the lower elevations, but the number of 
such trees is small, and their time in fruit is also rela­
tively short. At the other extreme, Cebus spends a great 
deal of time between the ground and 30 feet above, during 
its normal daily activities. Playing, searching for food, . 
and movement from one place to another can take place on the 
ground. Resting occurs between 1 to 60 feet above the 
ground on suitable lianas, trees, or other vegetation, but 
does not occur directly in contact with the ground, as has 
been observed in captivity (Bernstein, 1965). There may be 
several reasons for this: the dampness of the ground and 
associated irritating microfauna and flora, or the presence 
of biting and sucking anthropods, It may also be due to the 
lack of an immediate avenue of escape upwards in time of 
danger. 
The level of elevation of Cebus in the forest depends 
on several variables: the height of the forest in the area, 

PDF PAGE 21
12 
ranging somewhere between 30 and 130 feet; the presence of 
edible vegetation; conditions of the particular day; and 
possibly other more subtle variables. Since Cebus may move 
as much as a mile or more in a day they will move through 
many different combinations of conditions, and may in one day 
range between 0 and 130 feet elevation. 
Sources of Water 
Water is obtained from three general sources: water 
contained in the fruits or other vegetation consumed; standing 
water from tree holes, from basins formed by large buttress 
roots, or from other such enclosures; and less frequently 
from running water in small streams. Cebus was not observed 
to lick water from surfaces of plants, as has been reported 
from observations of captive animals (Nolte, 1958). 
In contrast, howler monkeys seem to be more restricted 
in their sources of water. Carpenter (1934) suggeste that 
howlers get most of their water from the vegetation they eat. 
Some water is also obtained by howlers during rain storms, 
when they lick the water off leaves and other surfaces, or 
catch the dripping water in their hands and then lick their 
fingers. 
The Diet of Cebus and Their Interaction 
with the Environment 
In comparison with the howlers, which are herbivorous 
and frugivorous (Carpenter, 1934), and red spider monkeys 

PDF PAGE 22
13 
which are frugivorous (Carpenter, 1935), the white-faced 
monkey can be considered omnivorous. A complete list of the 
plants eaten or used and animals eaten by Cebus during this 
study can be found in the Appendix. 
The diet of Cebus changes constantly from one day or 
season to the next (Table 2). The actual variation would be 
greatly increased if the changes in the insect populations, 
as reflected in the diet during the year, were presented. 
Insects on an average make up an estimated 20$ or less of the 
diet. An analysis of the stomach contents of one wild Cebus 
shot on the mainland showed that arthropods (including an 
orthopteran, a spider and some beetles) comprised about 25$ 
of that individual's intake that day in weight. The bulk 
of the weight consisted of the fruit of three plant species 
(Marcel Hladik, pers. com.). 
Most of the plant material ingested consists of the 
pulp, aril or other soft layer surrounding the seed or pit 
of the fruit (Table 3A). In those cases where the pit, or 
seed were swallowed, they were usually defecated intact 
(Table 2B). Examples of this include Cordia and Doliocarpus, 
where the defecated seeds were fully viable. In passage 
through the gut, however, some soluble substances were prob­
ably removed from at least the fleshy layer. 
Most of the other plant parts included in the diet were 
simply chewed but some of the material may have been swal­
lowed (Table 3A and 3B). Included were flowers (Clitoria), 
and new growth (Bactris, Desmoncus, and Gustavia), and a few 

PDF PAGE 23
Table 2. Seasonal Changes in Plant Diet of Cebus 
Species 
1966 1967 
Mar.Apr.May-Jun.Jul.Aug.Sep.Oct.Nov.Dec.Jan.Feb.Mar.Apr.May-Jun.Jul.Aug. 
15 15 15 15 15 15 15 15 15 15 15 15 15 15 15 15 15 15 
Gnetum leyboldii 
Astrocaryum 
standleyanum 
Bactris balanoidea 
Desmoncus drupe chinantlensis vine 
Oenocarpus 
panamenus 
Seheelea zonensis 
Anthurium spp. 
Costus spicatus 
Renealmia cernua 
Lacistema 
aggregatum 
Cecropia spp. 
Ficus spp. 
Olmedia aspera 
Coccoloba 
leptostachya 
Neea amplifolla 
Annona sp. 
Annona spragei 
Annona purpurea 
Desmopsis , 
panamensis 
Virola guatemalensis 
Hirtella triandra 
Inga spp. 
Clitoria arborescens 
Oleiocarpon 
panamense 
Zanthoxylum 
setulosum 
Protium panamense 
X 
XXX 
X 
X 
X 
X XX X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
XX X 
X 
X 
XX 
XXX 
XX X X XX 
X 
XXXX 
X X 
XXX X X 
X 
X X 
X 
XX XX XXXX X 
X 
X 
X 
X X 
X X 
X XX 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
XX X X 
XXX X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
XX 
X 
X 
XX 
XXX 
XX 
X 
X XXXXX X 
X 
X 
X 
XXX 
X 
X XXXX 
X X XX X 
XXXXX XX X 
X X XX 
XXX 
X X 
XX XXXXX 
XXX XXXX X 
X 
XX 
X X 
X X 
X 
X 

PDF PAGE 24
Table 2 (continued) 
Species 
1966 1967 
Mar.Apr.May-Jun.Jul.Aug.Sep.Oct.Nov.Dec.Jan.Feb.Mar.Apr.May-Jun.Jul.Aug. 
15 15 15 15 15 15 15 15 15 15 15 15 15 15 15 15 15 15 Mabea occidental is 
Sapium sp. 
Anacardium 
excelsum 
Mangifera indica 
Spondias mombin 
Allophylus 
psilospermus 
Cupania fulvida 
Cupania sylvatica 
Apeiba membranacea 
Ochroma pyramidale 
Sterculia apetala 
Doliocarpus major 
Rheedia edulis 
Rheedia madruno 
X X X XXX 
X X 
X XX X X 
X 
XX 
XXXXXX 
XX 
X 
X X 
X 
X 
XXXX 
XX 
X 
XXX 
X 
X 
X XXX 
XX XX XXX 
XXXX 
XXX 
XX 
X XX 
Hybanthus prunifolius 
Casearia nitida 
Hasseltia floribunda 
Lindackera laurina 
X 
X 
X 
XXXX 
X X 
Gustavia fruit 
leaves X XX XX 
superba 
Eugenia choapensis 
Eugenia nestiotica 
Miconia argentea 
Chrysophyllum spp. 
Maripa panamensis 
Cordia nitida 
Cordia bicolor 
" Cestrum11 
Coussarea impetiolaris 
Faramea occidentalis 
Randia armata 
Tocoyena pittieri 
XXX X X XX 
XX 
XXX 
X 
X XXXX 
XX XX 
X 
X XXX X X 
XXX 
X XX 
X X XXXXXX X 
XX XXX 
XXX X XXX X 
XX XX 
XX X 
X 
XXX XXX 
XXX X 
X XX 
XXX 
X 
XX 
XXX 
XXX 

PDF PAGE 25
Table 3. Components of the Plant Diet 
16 
A, Part of plant that serves as food source 
Part of plant Number of Species 
New growth of plant or branches 6 
Buds , - 3 
Parts of flowers 6 
Nectar in flowers 2 
Receptacle 3 
Berry (small) 8 
Aril or pulp around seed or pit 58 
Seed 3 
B, Part of plant most likely digested 
Part of plant Number of Species 
Plant material and soluble substances 53 
Fluid or soluble substance only 13 
Unknown 23 
C, Primary taste of part eaten to a human 
Taste Number of Genera 
Astringent 4 
Bitter 2 
Tingle or peppery 2 
Sour 1 
Tart , 3 
Turpentine 3 
Tasteless 1 
Canned prunes 3 
Fresh peas 2 
Lemon-like 2 
Nut-like 1 
Sugary or sweet 16 

PDF PAGE 26
17 
vines and seedlings. Although it has been reported that 
Cebus eats leaves (Enders, 1935), this activity was rarely 
observed during my study. 
Many insects or arthropods were eaten. During periods 
of the day, week, or month, when few fruits were available, 
capuchins tended to spread out over a large area and search 
constantly for something to eat. Insects and other small 
animals evidently were eaten during such activities (Table 4). 
An annotated list of the animal species eaten is included 
in the Appendix. 
It has previously been reported that Cebus are insect­
ivorous (Aldrich and Bole, 1937; Enders, 1935); however, there 
seems to be no mention of Cebus eating wasp nests. The 
wasp nests eaten by capuchins belonged to species which flee 
rather than sting when disturbed (Martin Naumann, pers. com.). 
Birds have been observed to be eaten by Cebus. "Birds, 
nestlings, and eggs, are eagerly sought, according to observers. 
Sylvestri stated that 'mono cariblanco' destroyed the eggs 
of a crested guan (Penelope cristata) that had built her 
nest in a tall tree near the clearing." (Enders, 1935). 
My own observations suggest that birds are rarely eaten. 
Once, an abandoned nest was dislodged and searched, but 
nothing was found. On another occasion, a broken blue egg 
shell on the ground attracted the attention of a year-old 
Cebus, after an adult had already passed the shell. The 
shell was picked up and then discarded. 

PDF PAGE 27
18 
Table 4. Animals Eaten by Cebus 
Arthropods Vertebrates 
ft 
Ticks Birds 
Spiders Rodents 
Grasshoppers 
Katydids 
Walking sticks 
Termites 
Spittlebugs 
Fulgorids 
Beetle larvae and adults 
Flies? 
Ants 
Wasps 
Not observed during this study. 

PDF PAGE 28
19 
Enders (1935) suggested that "arboreal rodents and, 
possibly, bats" might be eaten; however, a bat that I put 
in with some captive capuchins was not eaten. Enders also 
recites a story where a "mouse" ran through the cage of some 
captive white-faced monkeys and one of them grabbed the mouse 
and then ate it "calmly," I was able to make only one con­
firmatory observation of this, when two nestling squirrels 
were partially eaten by an adult male Cebus in the forest. 
It seems clear that most animals of small size, inverte­
brate or vertebrate, may be eaten. Only vertebrates that 
are unable to get away seem to be eaten. There is no indica­
tion that Cebus actively hunts or stalks, but rather that 
it grabs small animals that are in reach or near. 
Ecological Implications 
Cebus may be important generally in keeping the popula­
tion of insects in balance with the environment. This is 
certainly true for two species of insects. The adult myla-
brid beetle, Amblycerus centralis, lays its eggs in the 
seed pods of Apeiba membranacea, and almost all the pods on 
each tree are infested. A seed pod on the average had four 
grubs in it, and one was found with as many as 11. Capuchins 
very meticulously remove the grubs from most of the fruits, 
and thus lower the potentially high population for that year. 
If this did not occur, the production of seeds might be 
seriously reduced in following years. Similarly, capuchins 
feed heavily on spittlebugs when they are present in May. 

PDF PAGE 29
20 
Since these nymphs are at least potentially harmful to some 
trees and other plants, Cebus is important in limiting their 
harmful effects. 
To some extent Cebus may alter the morphological struc­
ture of the vegetation. A generalized and widespread activity 
involves breaking off live and dead branches during aggres­
sive encounters. It has also been suggested that Cebus breaks 
off dead branches to eliminate them as potential hazards in 
future travel (see Enders, 1935), although such activity was 
not observed during this study. More important, in this 
context, is the breaking off of new growth (Bactris, Desmoncus 
and Gustavia) for food. The ends of growing branches of 
Gustavia trees are frequently broken off by Cebus. This 
may have the same effect as pruning, and may cause the trees 
to be more heavily branched than they might otherwise be. 
Since Cebus eats the fruits and other reproductive parts 
of many species, it may have both positive and negative 
effects on the reproductive success of these plants. A 
Clitoria arborescens vine may be completely stripped of its 
flowers, and thus seed production will be eliminated for 
that year. Fruits of some species may be removed from the 
plant or eaten before they have had a chance to ripen. The 
seeds of some species may be eaten specifically, such as 
those of Hybanthus prunifolius and Mabea occidentalis. It 
seems likely that these negative effects are balanced by the 
large production of fruits and seeds by most plant species. 

PDF PAGE 30
21 
There are positive effects, however, particularly in 
increasing the range of seed dispersal. 
In contrast to the howler monkey (Carpenter, 1934), the 
white-faced monkey was often observed to carry fruit away 
from the tree from which it was obtained. Dispersal in this 
manner may take the seeds 50 or more feet away from the 
original site. More important, however, were those seeds 
which were swallowed and then defecated two or more hours 
later quite far from the source tree. Most of these seeds 
seem to be fully capable of germinating after this, and it 
is possible that the chances of successful germination have 
been increased by passage through the gut (Marcel Hladik, 
pers. com.). 
In addition to aiding in seed dispersal, these primates 
may serve as pollinators. This seemed very likely for the 
balsa tree, Ochroma pyramidale, where the monkeys inserted 
their heads deeply into the blossoms to feed. 
Carpenter (1934) reported that howler monkeys waste 
one-third of their food by dropping it, and suggested that 
this may be related "to the lack of fine motor coordination 
in manipulation." Capuchins also drop a large amount of food, 
but this is usually food that is rejected. A bunch of 200 
or more berries may be dropped after 10 or 15 ripe berries 
have been removed and eaten. Or, due to the abundance and 
stage of ripeness, only part of a fruit may be eaten before 
being dropped. 

PDF PAGE 31
22 
Territories 
Cebus groups during this study had a maximum size of 
15 individuals, and groups of this size maintained territories 
about 1/3 of a square mile in area (Fig. 2). On some days, 
depending on the species of trees in fruit and their location, 
capuchins spent time eating or traveling through much of 
their area. At other times, they may remain in one restricted 
part of their area for one or more days. During those periods 
or days when a group remained in a restricted part of its 
area, another group might move across the border to feed in 
the unoccupied section for an hour or two. Such overlaps 
appeared to be minor as well as temporary. 
The territories of four groups are shown outlined on 
the map (Fig. 2), and the location of other groups is also in­
dicated. These boundaries indicate the places where observed 
contacts between groups occurred and within which most of 
the daily movements of the respective groups were confined. 
The x's show where white-faced monkeys were observed by 
others during this period, and suggest that Cebus groups 
occupied most of the island. These boundaries generally 
hold true for the full duration of the study. 
Some of the fluctuations in group A's territory will 
illustrate the types of temporary and permanent change^' that 
may occur. Contact with group C was lost in June 1966, but 
was re-established in February 1967. Group C apparently was 
spending a major amount of its time south of Balboa trail 
during this period (see Figs. 1 and 2). On August 29th and 
October 20th, 1966 group A traveled from Thomas Barbour trail 
southward to RC Shannon 8 and then southwest to Balboa 8. 

PDF PAGE 32
TERRITORIES of CEBUS CAPUCIHUS 
1966 
MAf OF 
BARRO COLORADO ISLAND 
CANAL ZONE 
• Y*^» 
Figure 2. Territories of Cebus capucinus, 

PDF PAGE 33
24 
From this point group A moved northward again, and crossed 
W. M. Wheeler 8. On the 5th and 17th of October, group A 
moved across the northern part of C's territory, from T. 
Barbour 3 to R. C. Shannon 4 and then to W. M. Wheeler 4, 
which brought them back into their own area. As mentioned 
above, group C reappeared in February 1967. During June and 
July group C began to move into A's territory along the south 
side of T. Barbour at about the 300 to 400 meter markers. I 
did not observe C to cross to the north side of the trail. 
Group A during this period spent most of its time west of 
the laboratory clearing along David Fairchild trail. When 
I made these contacts with group C in A's territory, C always 
retreated southward to its territory along R. C. Shannon 
trail. Similar fluctuations probably also occurred between 
the boundaries of groups A and B along Fairchild trail, where 
group B usually moved out to Fairchild Point west of the trail, 
and A east of the trail. 
A more permanent change was taking place in group A's 
territory during the last few months of the study. A new 
group was formed from a nucleus of animals that had left 
group A. These animals eventually spent most of their time 
in the eastern section of group A's territory around the 
junction of T. Barbour and J. Van Tyne trails, along the 
border with group D. Territorial encounters (described 
below) eventually did develop between the new group and A, 
so that most likely some of this area will definitely be 
removed from group A's territory. 

PDF PAGE 34
25 
Locations of interactions between groups which were 
witnessed are listed here: Groups B and F? at Barbour-Lathrop 
-8, A and C south of Snider-Molino 5, A, and Ap at the dump, 
and at T. Barbour 7. Other interactions did occur but could 
not be confirmed. 
Fluctuations in Fruit Production Within 
and Between Territories 
There are differences in fruiting times between trees 
of the same species. This means that a particular fruit 
could form part of the diet over a long period of time, if 
the trees in a group's territory ripened at different times, 
rather than synchronously. Faramea, Desmopsis, and Scheelea 
are examples of this (see Table 2). If there are only a few 
trees of such a species in a group's territory, they may 
produce fruit synchronously; although trees of this species 
in an adjoining area or territory may fruit at a different 
time. Sterculia apetala is one of these. There were two 
Sterculia trees in group A's territory which bore fruit in 
January 1967, and at least one in group B's territory which 
bore fruit at the end of March and beginning of April 1967. 
A group's territory must be large enough to include a 
number of trees of each fruiting species. Although the forest 
is dense, trees of a particular species are usually widely 
scattered. Protium trees were located in only five sites 
in group A's territory, and Olmedia aspera was found on only 
one hillside. A minimum-sized territory must contain enough 
species to provide food at all times of the year, as well 

PDF PAGE 35
26 
as from one year to the next. There .must be a sufficient 
number of trees of each species, so that a low yield in one 
year will be balanced by a high yield in another of the same 
or of a different species. Protium was a very important food 
source for group A in March and April 1966; however, in 1967 
those trees produced neither flowers nor fruit. There also 
were indications of fluctuation in the fruit production of 
other species. Goodall (1965) has reported great variation in 
fruit crops from one year to another in the Gombe Stream 
Reserve in Tanganyika. She suggested that if in any one 
year, several species should fail to produce fruit, or pro­
duced very small amounts, the chimpanzee population would 
be adversely affected. 

PDF PAGE 36
27 
INDIVIDUAL STATUS AND GROUP ORGANIZATION 
Age and Sex Classes 
In this study four age classes were set up: infants, 
juveniles, subadults, and adults. Animals whose births were 
not observed were assigned to an age class on the basis of 
size and other related features. 
Infants 
Animals between birth and about 1 year of age were 
placed in this group. Those young infants that remained on 
their mother's backs were called dependent, and older infants 
capable of moving about by themselves, but still closely 
associated with their mothers, were called independent. In­
dependence develops slowly during the 4th, 5th and 6th months. 
Juveniles 
Animals that were half to slightly less than full adult 
size were placed in the juvenile classification. Two captive 
females were observed during their 3rd year of life, and 
they were still less than full adult female size. Thus, 
animals that were called juveniles were probably between 
1 and 4 years of age. 
Subadults 
This category was used only for males, between 4 and 
possibly 7 years. They are the same size as adult females, 

PDF PAGE 37
28 
but are less muscular, and possibly are smaller boned than 
adult or mature males. 
Adults 
An adult female is an animal about 4 years of age or 
older. It may have an infant associated with it. An adult 
or mature male is about the same body size as an adult female 
or subadult male, but has much larger shoulders, and has a 
square face rather than a vertically oval one. Some sexual 
dimorphism has been found in the skulls of Cebus (Schultz, 
i960). The squareness of the skull is probably due to in­
creased jaw muscle development, and possibly due to some 
bone growth. The canine teeth in these males are longer than 
in adult females. (Data obtained from museum specimens show 
that adult male upper canines are 13.8mm long and lower 
canines are 11.3mm long—average for 30, while female upper 
and lower canines are of equal length at 7.2mm—average for 
22.) I suspect that mature males are above 8 years of age 
and because of this they will be called "old" males. Records 
on two males at the Fort Sherman Zoo, Canal Zone, showed a 
well developed subadult as 6 years old, and a mature adult 
as 8 or more years old. It is not known how long capuchins 
live in the wild, but they are known to live in captivity 
25 or more years, and one male Cebus apella lived to 4l years 
of age in a zoo (HillJ i960, p. 4o4). 

PDF PAGE 38
29 
Reproductive Maturity and Genital Morphology 
In the wild two juvenile males became sexually active in 
their late 3rd or possibly early 4th years, and were seen 
to copulate with adult females; however, it is not known 
whether intromission actually occurred, or if it did occur, 
whether insemination took place. 
At birth females have a long pendulous clitoris, which 
is almost a replica of the male penis, and the -clitoris—has- -
a small bone, or os clitoris (Campbell, 1966, p. 255), as 
does the penis of the male. The vaginal opening exists as 
a slit on the posterior surface, extending to the tip of the 
clitoris. The tip of the clitoris in young females flattens 
into a disk similar to the glans of the male genital organ. 
Two captive females were observed during their 3rd and early 
4th years. Toward the end of this period the clitorises of 
both females started to change. They became somewhat shorter 
and stouter, the vaginal slits became pronounced, and the 
end of the clitorises became rounded. Study of a Cebus 
apella female (Hamlett, 1939) showed that menstrual activity 
started toward the end of the third year, suggesting that 
there may be some correlation between the onset of menstrua­
tion and the change in the morphology of the clitoris. 
Hamlett (1939) suggested that Cebus apella females may become 
fully reproductive after they have reached 4 years of age, 
and that menstruation occurs about every 18 days. 

PDF PAGE 39
30 
Forehead Patterns and Other Variations 
It was noticed during field observations that individ­
uals differed from one another, particularly in the forehead 
region (Fig. 3). Some of these forehead patterns seemed to 
be most frequent in capuchins of a certain age or sex. 
Infants at birth have dark grey to black hair on the 
forehead, the ears, the area in front of the ears, and down 
the bridge of the nose (Fig. 3A). By about 4 weeks of age 
the forehead is white or almost so (Fig. 3B). Some of the 
dark fur may remain for longer periods on the ears and the 
bridge of the nose. A black "spike" may be apparent when 
the forehead has become white, or it may appear toward the 
end of the second month (Fig. 3C). The black spike is re­
tained, and elongated, in some juveniles of both sexes 
(Fig. 3D) and in some adult females (Fig. 3L,M,N and 0). 
The same or other juvenile females may develop black spikes 
on the temples (Fig. 3G and L), which may later elongate 
(Fig. 3H and M). In some adult females the temple spikes 
appear to be wide patches or "columns" (Fig. 31 and N). 
Also there are some possibly old adult females which have 
elongate white (Fig. 3J) or black hairs (Fig. 30), covering 
the temple regions. 
Juvenile males in addition to having the spike pattern, 
may have a clear forehead (Fig. 3B), small black "horns" 
just in front of the ears (Fig. 3F), or white hairs of 
uneven length over-lapping on the black cap, giving a 

PDF PAGE 40
31 
Cebus capucinus Forehead Patterns 
A B C 
O 0 
F G H 
OOO 
K L M ' 
000 
Figure 3. Cebus capucinus forehead patterns. The faces 
have been drawn the same size and shape regardless 
of the age or sex class it is specific to. The 
forehead patterns are: A, newborn infant; B. and 
C. infants between four weeks and one year; B., D., 
and G. juvenile females; B., H., I., J., L., M., 
N., and 0. adult females; B.9 F., and K. juvenile 
or subadult males; and E. adult male. 

PDF PAGE 41
31 
Cebus capucinus Forehead Patterns 
: forehead patterns. The faces 
" the same size and shape regardless 
ex class it is specific to. The 
•ns are: A, newborn infant; B. and 
een four weeks and one year; B., D., 
females; B., H., I., J., L., M., 
t females; B., F., and K. juvenile 
es; and E. adult male. 

PDF PAGE 42
32 
"serrated" effect (Fig. 3K). Adult males, those with the 
heavier stature and square faces, usually have a white flame 
or forelock that rises into the black cap (Fig. 3E), although 
some adult males may lack it (Fig. 3B). 
Each of the groups observed on the island had individuals 
representing most of the forehead patterns mentioned above. 
Cebus skins in three museums (American Museum of Natural 
History, Chicago Field Museum and the U.S. National Museum) 
were studied. The hair on the forehead of males is about 5mm 
long (average for 35 individuals, range l-10mm), on the 
foreheads of short-haired females it is 8mm long (average for 
26 individuals, range of 5-Hmm) and on the foreheads of 
long-haired females (Fig. 3J and 0) it is about 23mm long 
(average for 28 individuals, range of l4-35mm). 
Hill (I960, p. 421) states that the "frontal tufts" or 
elongate hairs are found in females of C_. griseus and _C. 
albifrons and in only one subspecies of C_. capucinus, that 
is C. c. imitator. Among the skins I was able to examine 
were two female _C. c_. limitans from Honduras, and two from 
Nicaragua, one female _C. _c. nigripectus from Columbia, and 
one female _C. c_. capucinus from Columbia, which had either 
elongate white or black hairs (Fig. 3J and 0). From these 
and other skins examined, it appears that the forehead 
patterns found on _C. c_. imitator of Barro Colorado Island 
are found throughout the full range of the species. 
In addition to these basic forehead patterns, other 
variations occurred, which helped me to distinguish one 

PDF PAGE 43
33 
individual from another. These were black spots or moles 
on the white face, or small patches of white fur on the black 
caps, or less frequently elsewhere on the dark-furred body. 
There was also some variation in the whiteness of the fur on 
the face, neck, shoulders, and chest. Some animals had a 
yellowish tinge to the fur, and one infant purchased in Panama 
City had a very prominent reddish coloration in the white 
area. These forehead patterns and the black or white spots 
elsewhere on the body were used to identify individuals, 
and also different groups of capuchins. 
Group Size, Structure and Dynamics 
Group Size and Structure 
Censusing an active arboreal species is difficult. The 
size of the group is difficult to determine as usually only 
a few individuals are visible at any one instant. And unless 
groups are recognized, contact with one group at several 
different places will result in an over-estimate of population 
size. 
Most of the groups that were studied were recognized by 
the distinctive features of the adult male(s) in the group. 
Groups A, A2, and G had one adult male, while groups A-,, B, 
and C had two adult males. The rest of the groups (D,E,F,H) 
definitely had one adult male, but may have had two. All 
of the groups had three or four adult females, and one group 
(A) had five. There were usually twice as many juveniles 
and infants as there were adults in the group. Maximum group 

PDF PAGE 44
34 
size during this study was about 15 animals, as typified by 
groups A and B. 
Table 5 gives a general idea of group structure during 
this study. Two things are noticeable: there were more 
females than males, and males between the ages of 4 and 7 
years appeared to be absent. It seems possible, although 
direct evidence is still to be obtained, that when subadult 
males have reached sexual maturity in their late 4th, or early 
5th year, they leave or are forced to leave their group to 
become extra-group or solitary males. They may return to 
the same group or join a new group three or four years later, 
after having developed into mature adult males. One adult 
male was seen by himself once in group A's territory on the 
west side of the laboratory clearing, and I did not recognize 
him as being a member of groups A, B, or C. Several subadult 
and adult males attempted to join some adult females forming 
a new group over a period of several months (see below); 
however, it is not known whether these males came from other 
groups, or were living separately. 
No deaths were observed during this study, and wounds 
in general were rare. At the present time it appears that 
the birth and mortality rates for the two sexes were the 
same, and that the difference between the number of adult 
females and males in a group could be accounted for by in­
cluding extra-group males. 
Bernstein (1964a) saw groups of Cebus on the island 
during the dry season of 1962 that contained 6 to 8 adults, 

PDF PAGE 45
35 
Table 5. Generalized Group Structure of Cebus capucinus 
Age Females Males Total 
8 years and 
above 
4 years and 
above 
2 to 4 years 
1 to 2 years 
0 to 1 years 
Total 
Per cent 
3+ 
3 
1 
1 
8 
57$ 
2 
2 
1 
1 
6 
43$ 
2 
3+ 
5 
2 
2 
14+ 
100$ 

PDF PAGE 46
36 
although he suspected that some groups were larger. Other 
groups have been observed on the island that numbered between 
18 and 24 members (Enders, 1935)." Although groups of other 
Cebus species have been reported containing as many as 40 
individuals, some groups observed were more similar to that 
seen on Barro Colorado Island during the present study (see 
Hill, i960, p. 385). Cebus apella groups which numbered 
between 8 and 18 have been seen, where much of the groups were 
made up of young animals (Ktthlhorn, 1939). In most cases, 
the groups usually contained one or two old adult males (see 
Hill, i960, p. 385; and KUhlhorn, 1939). 
Solitary males have also been reported. Some have been 
seen on Barro Colorado Island (Bernstein, 1964a; Enders, 1935), 
and some have been seen during observations of Cebus in South 
America (Hill, i960, p. 385). 
In general, my observations on the size and general 
group structure of a Cebus group, agree with previous reports 
for this and other species of Cebus. The fact that group 
size varies within each of the species most likely reflects 
fluctuations in the size of the populations. Data collected 
in the past suggest that the Cebus population on Barro 
Colorado Island does fluctuate, as does the howler popula­
tion, but that the two do so independently (Collias and 
Southwick, 1952). 
Group Dynamics 
The composition of groups may change gradually over a 
period of time. Group A was observed for the 18 months of the 

PDF PAGE 47
37 
study, and some of the basic changes in composition that 
occurred can be seen in Table 6. In March 1966 Group A had 
15 individuals: one old male, five adult females, five 
juveniles, one independent infant, and three dependent infants. 
Two of the adult females (2FA and 3PA) were seen less fre­
quently than the other members. Starting in November I began 
to see these females frequently together in the eastern part 
of group A's territory (Fig. 2). One of the females (2FA) 
had an infant (15?I) with her, and one juvenile (11?J) was . 
also with the females. This juvenile may have been 3FA's 
infant of the previous year. Contact was maintained with 
the main group through the end of March 1967. Several times 
in January the adult females, particularly 2FA, were seen 
for part of a day with the main group. Gradually these two 
adult females began to show territorial behavior (as des­
cribed below) and as early as February 20th they had a some­
what stressful meeting with the main group at Thomas Barbour 5. 
The last peaceful contact between these two groups, which 
will now be called Aj^ and A2, occurred on March 27. The old 
male of group A,, and a 'new' old male (17MA) spent the 
morning with the females and young of A2, but by noon the 
males had returned to A-,. From April on the groups remained 
separate and had territorial encounters, even though A2 was 
without an adult male. 
Several adult males did associate with the females of 
A2. One male (17MA) was seen several times with A2 during 
January, and then dropped out of sight until February 27th. 

PDF PAGE 48
Table 6. Changes in and Origin of a Cebus Group 
Group MAR APR MAY JUN 
March 1966 - August 1967 
JUL AUG SEP OCT NOV DEC JAN FEB MAR APR MAY JUN JUL AUG Group 
IMA IMA 
17MA. . 1 17MA 
2FA 
3FA 
4FA 4FA 
5FA 5FA 
A 6FA 6FA A, 
7MJ 7MA 
(15) 8MJ 8MA (I4) 
9FJ 9FJ 
10FJ 10FJ 
11? J 
12FI 12FJ 
13MI 13MJ 
14FI 14FJ 
15?x 
16?I l6?i 
18?1 18?I 
Code for Individuals 
M = Male 
F = Female 
? = Sex Unknown 
A = Adult (4+ years) 
J = Juvenile (1-4 years) 
I = Infant (0-1 years) 
17MA 
22MA 24MA 
23MA 23MA 
2FA 2FA 
3FA 3FA 
19FA 19FA 
20?J 20?J 
11? J 11? J 
15?1 15? J 
21?1 21?I 
(8) 

PDF PAGE 49
39 
On that day he was seen on the periphery of group A^ during 
a rest period. He was seen several more times with group An 
during March. By the end of June, 17MA was able to sit next 
to and in contact with IMA, and had become the second old 
male of group A1. On May 18 a subadult male (22MA) was seen 
with A2, and on the following day he was gone. In his place 
was an adult male (23MA), and_it is this male that became 
the old male of Ap. One or two subadult males were seen 
briefly with group A2 during June, but they did not stay. 
In March an adult female and her juvenile (19FA, 20?J), 
possibly from group D, joined the two adult females of A2 
and their young, and remained with the group (see Table 6). 
Three of the adult females of A-, and Ap gave birth to 
young during the dry season of 1967: 6FA gave birth on the 
night of January 1st, 5FA gave birth between the 10th and 
12th of March, and 3FA gave birth between the 27th of March 
and the 6th of April. 
Several important points should be made here. One is 
that adult females (2FA, 3FA and 19FA) left their groups, and 
were able to form a new group on their own, without the 
presence or assistance of an adult male. One of the original 
females (2FA) was more active than the other two and it could 
be said that she was able to attract females and young from 
two groups to form a group of her own. She was also able to 
defend her group's territory against the group of which she 
was previously a member, without the assistance of a male. 

PDF PAGE 50
40 
Subadult and adult males associated with these females 
at one time or another, but they seemed to remain on the 
periphery of the group. One adult male (17MA) spent some 
time with these females, but eventually left them for the 
main group, where he was gradually accepted and remained. 
Another adult male (23MA) joined these females with young and 
gradually became a member of their group. These males were 
either members of other groups and were attracted away by 
these females, or the males were unattached and were searching 
for a group to join. These males did not display agnostic 
behavior toward one another as a rule, and one was accepted 
by a group that already had an adult male. But fights between 
males trying to join a group did occur. One subadult (22MA) 
male was seen with A2 on May 18 and he was gone the following 
day. In his place was an adult male (23MA), who had a large 
and deep gash across the back of his left heel. What hap­
pened to the subadult (22MA) is not known. 
Two last points concern the possibility of seasonal 
births and the frequency with which births occur. Three or 
four of the females of group A had infants in the dry season 
of 1966, and three of these females had infants in the dry 
season of 1967. It has been suggested in the past, that 
Cebus on Barro Colorado Island might give birth seasonally 
(Chapman, 1938, p. 170). Hamlett (1939) found that adult 
Cebus apella females in central Brazil, were continuously 
cyclic, with menstruation occurring approximately every 18 
days. He found from data on dead animals, however, that 

PDF PAGE 51
4l 
most births occurred in May-June and October-November. These 
periods may be related to some part or parts of the dry 
season, but I have not been able to confirm this. The gesta­
tion period is alleged to be between 5 and 6 months long 
(Hamlett, 1939; Hill, i960, p. 402). My data suggest that 
Cebus on Barro Colorado Island tend to have births in the 
dry season, or early rainy season. There is also an indication 
that some females may give birth to young two or more years 
in a row, but that others may skip a year or two between 
births. 

PDF PAGE 52
42 
GENERAL BEHAVIOR 
Locomotion 
Cebus is predominantly a quadrupedal animal using a 
diagonal or crossed extension gait during slow movement. In 
faster quadrupedal movement, the diagonal gait is usually 
replaced by a gallop, where the arms are brought forward, 
almost together, followed by the legs. Cebus gallop across 
the branches or on the ground, while moving from one place 
to another, or during a playful or agonistic encounter. Tri-
pedal walking is usually rapid, and is employed when some­
thing is being carried in one arm, or when an arm or leg is 
injured. Bipedal movement, although infrequent, also occurs 
when capuchins are on the ground. Short sequences of a few 
steps occur when individuals are searching for an object 
hidden from sight by roots, grass or other structures. Longer 
sequences of bipedal locomotion are used when objects, such 
as fruit, are being carried in one or both arms. The capu­
chins may walk slowly or rapidly on their hind legs; however, 
as speed picks up they usually switch from running to hopping. 
In the forest, bipedal locomotion is used to cover distances 
of just a few feet until a tree is reached. In the open 
areas around the laboratory clearing, members of group A 
would pick up bread, and then walk,. run, or hop on their 
hind legs 4o to 50 feet back to the trees. Monopedal loco­
motion, or hopping, was observed once, when a monkey tried 

PDF PAGE 53
43 
to carry bread away, in his mouth, arms, and left foot. This 
turned out to be very awkward and the animal redistributed 
his load, and hopped away bipedally. Regardless of the type 
of horizontal movement, the tail is carried somewhat curled, 
or hanging behind, and is not used as a fifth arm, as it is 
by Ateles (Eisenberg and Kuehn, 1966; pers. obs.). 
Vertical ascent and descent are accomplished in several 
ways. Climbing up saplings or vines of small diameter, where 
the thumb or pollex can oppose the other fingers, is done 
hand over hand, with the legs following as in the diagonal 
gait. The hands are used to pull the animal up, while the 
legs are used for support. In larger trees, where the thumb 
is unable to oppose the other fingers, the arms are wrapped" 
around the trunk and used somewhat to pull the animal up; 
however, they are used mostly for support to maintain the 
position already gained. The legs are used in unison to push 
the monkey up, and this is followed by rapidly moving the 
arms up the tree to obtain a new holding position. If the 
vine or tree is somewhat slanted, capuchins are able to walk 
or run up or down it in their normal diagonal gait, with a 
hand and foot grip (the great toe, or hallux, is opposable) 
being used on the vines. 
Vertical descent down vines or small diameter trees is 
usually feet first, with a hand under hand, foot under foot 
motion, resembling the diagonal gait, but in reverse. Descent 
down trees of large diameter, however, is somewhat more 
complicated. Cebus may move downward feet first as on small 

PDF PAGE 54
44 
vines, but with the hand and forearm wrapped around the trunk. 
Capuchins may also descend head first, sliding on their 
hands, which are extended in front of them, and on their hind 
feet, which are brought under the body. In this latter 
method of descent, the tail is wrapped around the tree trunk, 
and serves to hold the monkey to the tree, i.e., functions 
as a brake to slow the descent. On long descents, the monkey 
may alternate between these two methods, moving down feet 
first, then head first, then feet first, and so on. 
When Cebus cross from the branch of one tree to the 
branch of another within reach, the tail, leg or legs, or 
one of the arms is used to anchor its position until a good 
grip has been obtained on the new branch, with one or both 
hands. An individual may hold on to the old branch with legs, 
and/or tail, while it pulls the new branch to it, in order 
to get a grip on a stronger part of the branch. Capuchins 
do not set the tree they are in into a swaying motion in 
order to bring it closer to the next tree, as I have seen 
Ateles do. 
Several types of jumps are performed by the white-faced 
monkeys. Objects, such as another monkey on a branch, are 
leapt over. The legs provide the power, while the arms are 
stretched in front as the animal arches over the object and 
then lands on its hands. The legs are brought forward on 
landing, just behind the hands. Horizontal jumps of 7 to 
10 feet, or more, are made between trees (Fig. 4A). The 
monkeys land upright, with their arms stretched in front of 

PDF PAGE 55
45 
them so that they carf grab hold and with their legs partly 
extended. The feet are ready to cushion the shock and to 
provide power for an immediate move. One adult female made 
a 6 foot jump with an infant on her back, and with only one 
functional arm. 
Vertical drops may be combined with such horizontal 
leaps, so that the animal will land in the lower branches of 
another tree, or in a tangle of vines. When springing away, 
the monkey thrusts strongly with its hind legs and throws 
its arms out beyond its head, falling with its arms out­
stretched. The only limit to these drops is the height of 
the tree which is being left behind. Drops of 10 to 20 feet 
are frequent. One monkey was observed to cross a gap of 
12 feet, while also dropping 50 feet (Enders, 1935). 
One other means of crossing a gap involves the coopera­
tion of a second animal, usually an adult. The adult will 
use its body to bridge the gap, while a younger animal, pos­
sibly its offspring, crawls across the adult's back to the 
next tree or branch (Fig. 4). Similar aid to young in 
crossing gaps has been observed in howler monkeys (Carpenter, 
1934). 
Resting and Sleeping Positions 
One or more daily rest periods are usually taken by an 
individual or by the group as a whole, in addition to noc­
turnal rest or sleep. White-faced monkeys sleep high in the 
trees at night and are hidden by the leaves from the ground. 

PDF PAGE 56
Figure 4. A. 
B. 
C. 
Adult jumping from palm frond to tree with out-stretched 
arms. 
Adult looking back at juvenile hidden in leaves. 
Adult holds up palm frond while juvenile walks across and 
up her back. Observe adult's use of tail. 
Both have crossed and are leaving. Note the high position 
of palm frond at low right compared to above right. 

PDF PAGE 57
47 
Thus, only the resting or sleeping positions observed during 
the day will be described. They are probably similar to 
those used at night. Two general positions are used. The 
first position is associated with brief rests taken during 
a group activity period, or during a group rest period. The 
animal lies belly down on a branch or vine with its tail 
curled around that branch, or other nearby structure. The 
legs and possibly the arms hang down on their respective sides 
of the branch, and the chin rests directly on the branch. 
At other times, one or both hands may be folded under the 
chin as a cushion. The second position usually occurs during 
a long rest period, when the individual may sleep for 30 to 
60 minutes (Fig. 5). The monkey lies on its side, with the 
body stretched-out or curled, and with the arms and legs 
brought up against the chest and abdomen, respectively. The 
tail may be coiled around the branch, but may also be brought 
up against the body. The face is not covered as has been 
suggested, nor are the two resting positions related to the 
environmental temperature (see Hill, i960, p. 390). Resting 
animals may lie separately or together, and usually they 
are in the shade. 
Other positions such as sitting, or lying on the back, 
are used during rest periods or other activities (see below). 
The end of the tail is usually wrapped around some near-by 
structure for additional support (Fig. 6). 

PDF PAGE 58
Figure 5. Three members of group A at rest. -tr 
OO 

PDF PAGE 59
i ^^gfo9&3H%^^ 
49 
Figure 6. Chapman, old male of group G, sitting and 
watching. Notice the large shoulders, arms, 
and tail, the square face, and the white 
flame on the forehead, all characteristics 
of an old male. 

PDF PAGE 60
Feeding and Drinking Behavior 
50 
Cebus fed from several different positions: supported 
by all four limbs and the tail (Figs. 7 and 8); supported by 
the legs, tail, and rump, while sitting (Fig. 9); supported 
by the body, legs, and tail, while lying down; and supported 
mainly (Fig. 10) or completely by the tail while hanging. 
Food was usually handled first by the hands, although some­
times only the twig or branch holding the fruit was touched 
by the hands. Hard fruits were struck on branches to soften 
them, and then the fingers and canine teeth used to pry the 
fruit open. The incisors might be used to gnaw off the flesh 
or outer covering (Fig. 9). The skin and seeds were often 
spit out. If the fruit was juicy, the monkey's head was 
tilted back so that the juice ran into the mouth. 
Some selection of the food was made visually, but olfac­
tory selection was probably as important. Taste seemed to 
regulate the amount of a fruit eaten, particularly in regard 
to the stage of ripeness, and taste may play a part in deter­
mining whether a species would be eaten at all. 
During travel through the trees, individuals carefully 
unrolled dead leaves, inserted their hands into small open­
ings, pulled wood or bark from trees, or engaged in other 
activities suggesting they were looking for insects. Very 
little can be said about the actual eating of insects. The 
legs of walking sticks were usually pulled off and eaten 
first. Caterpillars frequently were pulled apart so that 
the viscera were exposed, but I am not sure whether this 

PDF PAGE 61
Figure 7. A three year old male feeds from a balsa flower. 

PDF PAGE 62
Figure 8. Two juveniles of group C feeding on some part of a yellow 
epiphytic bromeliad. VJ1 
ro 

PDF PAGE 63
9. Ocean, adult female of group A, breaking open 
Mabea with teeth to get at seed. A twig with 
fruits is being held at her feet. 

PDF PAGE 64
Figure 10. A Cebus, holding on with its tail, pulls fruit 
off of Scheelea palm to eat. 

PDF PAGE 65
55 
was done so that the viscera could be eaten or discarded. In 
one case, the viscera of a grasshopper was discarded. Ant 
nests on the bottom side of leaves were licked quickly, while 
wasp nests, similarly placed, were bitten into. In both cases, 
the leaves and some nest fragments were dropped. The monkeys 
were not observed to catch insects in the air, as has been 
observed in captive individuals (Nolte, 1958). 
When the two infant squirrels were eaten, the old male 
of group A held one in each hand, and nipped, or chewed the 
gray pigmented skin off with his incisors. He then chewed 
the skin well before removing more from the squirrels. When 
he was finished with the first squirrel, he dropped it, and 
started on the second one. Both squirrels were dead when 
the male was first observed eating them, and they were prob­
ably removed from a nest. 
In the wild, Cebus was not observed to eat from a 
"table" formed by crossing its arms on its chest as Nolte 
(1958) had observed in captive animals. 
When water is obtained from a tree hole, a hand was 
usually inserted into the water. The hand was then brought 
up to the face, and the water allowed to drip into the mouth 
from the fingers, or licked or sucked directly off the fur 
on the back of the hand or arm. In those instances, where 
the surface of the water was accessible, the stagnant, brown 
colored water might be taken directly into the mouth. Water 
from streams was also taken directly into the mouth, but I 
was able to make only a few observations of this. 

PDF PAGE 66
56 
Infants suckled from their mothers during the first few 
months, and sometimes through the first year. The young clung 
to the chest of the mother with their hands, and suckled 
from one breast and then the other. The mother might assist 
by supporting the infant with an arm behind its back. Certain 
vocalizations were sometimes emitted just before the animal 
started to suckle (see below). Adults were never observed 
to give, or share, solid food with young animals, and in most 
cases they actively resisted attempts of young to get food 
from them by turning or moving away. 
Body Care and Elimination of Wastes 
Autogrooming 
Capuchins had two different methods of grooming them­
selves. In the first type, the parts of the body that were 
visible to the animal were carefully inspected visually, 
and cleaned with the hands and teeth. The teeth were most 
often used on the extremities, such as the hands, lower arms, 
legs, and tail, The hair was usually carefully parted with 
the index finger and thumb of one hand, while the fingers 
of the other hand, or the teeth, were used to remove particles. 
These particles might consist of dead skin, matted hair, or 
they might possibly be ticks or other ecto-parasites. Some 
of these particles were taken in the mouth and eaten. 
The second type of grooming was done quickly without 
the attention of the eyes, and consisted of scratching. The 
sides, belly, lower and middle back, and legs were scratched 

PDF PAGE 67
57/58 
with the hand of the same side; while the upper part of the 
back, shoulders, upper arms, chest, neck, parts of the head, 
and the ears, were scratched with the foot of the same side. 
The tip of the tail was sometimes used by the captive animals 
to scratch the back or neck. 
The external meatus of the ear, was cleaned specifically 
with the second toe, and the nail of this toe is 2 to 3mm 
longer than the nails of the other toes (Fig. 11). This dif­
ference in nail length is observable in newborn infants, 
as well as adults, and grooming of the ear was the only activity, 
other than locomotion, for which this toe was used. The 
greater length of the nail must be of some advantage in 
cleaning the ear. 
Self-grooming may occur at any time of the day. A Cebus 
may momentarily stop some activity, such as travel or eating 
to scratch, although more intensive grooming was usually 
limited to rest periods (Fig. 12). Vocalizations were not 
associated with this activity, in contrast to observations 
of captive animals by Nolte (1958). 
In addition to grooming or scratching, spines or hairs 
from vegetation, or sticky liquids on the hands were usually 
wiped off on a branch, or licked. Grooming of the genitalia 
has also been observed. Subadult males were seen to scrape 
white material, suspected to be dried semen, from the penis. 
It is not known whether the presence of the semen was brought 
about-by sexual activity with a female, or whether masturba­
tion occurred. 

PDF PAGE 68
Figure 11. Foot of infant Cebus showing greater length of nail on 
second toe, low right, as compared to nails of third, 
fourth and fifth toes, above. The second toe is used 
to clean the external meatus of the ear. 
VJ1 

PDF PAGE 69
Figure 12. Adult male, Spot, at left and juvenile 
male, Serrate, inspecting their own hands, 
o 

PDF PAGE 70
61 
Preliminary data from four Cebus in one cage, showed 
that adult males autogroomed twice as much as adult or juvenile 
females, but that all of them spent more time autogrooming, 
than allogrooming. 
Care of Wounds 
Wounds, although rare, were diligently looked after. All 
of the wounds observed, two in the wild and several in cap-
tivity were the result of canine slashes and occurred on the 
extremities. Such wounds were usually half an inch or more 
deep, and two or more inches long, with much muscle tissue 
ripped and displaced. The wounds rarely bled much and were 
repeatedly licked clean. Hard material, such as matted hair 
or dead skin, was nipped, chewed or pulled off. The skin 
usually healed over in 2 to 4 weeks, but full function of the 
extremity, or repair of the muscles might take longer. 
One adult female of group A was gashed above the left 
elbow, possibly by the male spider monkey that accompanied 
the group. The arm was not used for the first several weeks. 
After 5 weeks some fruit was held briefly in the left hand, 
but the fingers were always partially bent. During the 5th 
and 6th weeks after the wound was received, the bent arm 
was used as a hook to help in climbing trees. By the 8th 
week the arm was almost fully functional, but the thumb was 
still stiff, and held close to the index finger. The second 
wound that was observed in the wild, was a slash across the 
heel of an adult male that joined group Ap. This wound was 

PDF PAGE 71
62 
probably received in a fight with another male. Although 
the monkeys were rarely observed to react to flying insects, 
the female with the elbow gash became extremely sensitive 
to the presence of insects, most likely flies, while the wound 
was open. She would sit up abruptly, with her mouth wide open 
as if to bite, and then would swing her good arm in the air, 
as if to knock the insects away. A second female, when with 
her, would frequently assist her by doing the same. Usually 
after this the wounded female would move away to another spot. 
Although other individuals showed some interest in wounds, 
by sometimes smelling or licking them, care of wounds was 
left to the wounded individuals. 
Rubbing Substances into the Fur 
On two different occasions in the wild, capuchins were 
observed to rub plants into their fur, and then to scratch 
themselves vigorously with the hands and feet, even in areas 
where the plant had not been rubbed. The two plants used 
were the' leaf and stem parts of Dieffenbachia oerstedii and 
the fruit of Annona hayesii. The first species was rubbed 
into the fur by an old male, an adult female, and a juvenile 
- male, that were on the ground together. The leaf and stem 
parts of Dieffenbachia were mashed as they were rubbed into 
the fur, and a skunk-like or mephitic odor was released. 
The fruit of the Annona was picked and rubbed into the fur 
by an adult female. The female carried the fruit to another 
tree where she was able to sit. She bit into the fruit 

PDF PAGE 72
63 
several times and exposed new flesh, from which a peppery 
odor was released. The fresh surfaces of the fruit were 
rubbed into the fur with the hands and feet. In both cases 
the scratching that followed, was much more vigorous than 
that which usually occurred during grooming. I tried rubbing 
both plants on my skin, but did not experience any irritation, 
even though Dieffenbachia is supposed to be irritating. Both 
plants, however, did give off very strong odors, and Cebus 
might at times find these attractive. 
The oily fruit of Virola guatamalensis was given to 
some caged capuchins and they rubbed parts of the fruit into 
their fur, as they did with other things, such as leaves. 
Nolte (1958) found that captive Cebus apella would rub onions, 
vinegar, ammonia, cologne water, and other strong smelling 
substances into the fur, and would follow with scratching. 
Lit cigarettes were also rubbed and pressed into the fur, but 
the mere presence of smoke from burning tobacco was enough 
to elicit this type of behavior (Hill, i960, p. 387; Nolte, 
1958; pers. obs.). Cebus has been observed in captivity to 
rub live ants, and also formic acid, into the fur (Nolte, 
1958). Arthropods, such as spiders and grasshoppers, pre­
sented as food to a captive Cebus apella, were pressed 
against the body (Hill, i960, p. 387). 
It seems to me that rubbing of substances into the fur 
by Cebus is most likely unrelated to "anting" in birds, 
as has been proposed (Hill, i960, p. 387). Captive animals 
used a much wider range of naturally occurring materials, 

PDF PAGE 73
64 
than did wild Cebus, and thus the stimulus eliciting this 
behavior is either stronger or more generalized, under the 
artificial conditions. Insects, for instance, were eaten 
quickly, and remnants, if any, were dropped in the wild. Al­
though more study of this behavior pattern is needed, I believe 
that the odor of the substance, and possibly some unknown 
physiological after-effect, are important factors. 
Urine Rubbing 
Males from about 3 years of age up were observed in the 
wild to rub urine on their feet and hands. Usually the leg 
and arm of one side was brought under the body, where the 
urine was sprayed over the upper side of the foot and leg, 
and the hind part of arm and hand. The two limbs were rubbed 
back and forth, sole and back of leg against palm and back 
of forearm, while the urine was applied. The tail might 
also be brought under the body and rubbed with them. As a 
result of this rubbing, the urine was distributed over the 
limbs, and particularly, on the surfaces that came in contact 
with the environment: palm, sole, and prehensile tip of tail. 
This probably only took a few seconds from start to finish. 
This type of behavior usually occurred when a male was 
in a situation where it would be useful to establish his 
presence and identity, e.g., when coming in contact with 
another group, when attacking caged Cebus in the forest, when 
preparing to protect the group against approaching humans, 
and on the rare occasions when an infant climbed onto an 

PDF PAGE 74
65 
old male's back. It seemed very likely that the urine served 
as a temporary identifier of the male. During encounters 
between groups the urine odor would serve to identify the 
area as belonging to a particular male or group. 
This behavior has been observed in captive C_. apella 
(Nolte, 1958), and in other cebids (Hill, i960, p. 390), in 
galagos and in the loris (Use, 1955). The motor patterns 
described for this behavior in the loris are very similar to 
those which I observed in the Cebus, except that pressure 
did not seem to be exerted by the hind foot on the genitalia. 
Use observed this behavior in two captive immature males 
and suggested that it was probably used to mark out territories. 
It seems likely that in Cebus a slightly stressful situation 
such as a territorial encounter will evoke urine rubbing in a 
male. 
Urination and Defecation 
Elimination of solid and liquid wastes occurred at any 
time of the day, during travel, eating, or rest. When 
urinating or defecating, the animal usually lowered its' hind 
quarters, and lifted the base of its tail slightly. The 
capuchin usually assumed a position so that wastes were 
dropped to the ground rather than on the branch or other 
structure on which the monkey was standing. 
Fecal material was usually solid and composed of 
digested and undigested plant materials. The skin, flesh 
and seeds of some species of fruit were found intact in the 

PDF PAGE 75
66 
fecal material, except for having been chewed while in the 
mouth. Other fruits, such as Doliocarpus, were defecated 
intact, except for their outer shell, with a great deal of 
liquid. These seeds, and others, seemed to be defecated 
within a few hours after being swallowed. Seeds that I recov­
ered from fecal material and planted, usually germinated. 
Newborn infants urinated on their mother's backs and 
the urine ran off the mother's fur. After an infant had 
reached about 2 months of age it sat cjoss-wise on its 
mother's back, and raised the base of its tail so that 
the urine fell directly to the ground. The mother did not 
appear to notice this behavior or its consequences. 
Release of fecal material or urine was not associated 
with stressful conditions, such as the presence of a predator 
or a human, as has been observed in Alouatta (Carpenter, 
1934; pers. obs.). 
Daily Activity 
The pattern of activity varied greatly from day to day, 
and was very much dependent upon the food sources available. 
If the trees in fruit had low yields, and were spread 
throughout the territory, much of the day would be spent 
feeding, and traveling with several short rest periods occur­
ring. If food were abundant and concentrated, then short 
feeding periods, followed by long rest periods and little 
travel might make up the day. These two situations present 
the extremes in their simplest form, as usually 4 to 11 

PDF PAGE 76
67 
species of plants were eaten daily at a minimum, and each 
plant species had a particular abundance and distribution 
that varied from day to day (Table 2). 
Data from 46 complete and partial days of observation 
were used to construct Table 7. Each general category of 
behavior, such as moving, eating, and playing, that occurred 
during a 10-minute interval was recorded for that interval. 
In this way, a 10-minute period was divided equally among the 
behavior categories observed. If only eating and moving 
were observed, each was awarded 5 minutes. Each hour of the 
day had six 10-minute intervals. For the table, the first 
and last three 10-minute intervals in the hour were lumped 
together to give half hour values. The data used in Table 7 
were recorded from days scattered throughout the wet and dry 
seasons, and include days when entirely different plant 
species made up the diet. Each half-hour period during the 
main part of the day was somewhat similar to the other half-
hour periods. Thus, Table 7 represents an idealistic day, 
and suggests that Cebus is flexible in its daily behavior, 
and that a particular type of behavior can occur any time of 
the day. 
However, some trends can be noted from these data. 
Moving, as a category, included both travel and general move­
ment as opposed to rest. It was the predominant activity 
for all members of the group between dawn and dusk, and 
occurred at about the same frequency throughout this period. 

PDF PAGE 77
68 
Table 7. Per Cent of Time Spent in an Activity Each Half-hour 
Night Dawn Day 
Sleep 100 60 
Play 27-7-243422' 
Allogrooming 15 13 11 12 18 12 11 16 7 8 11 ' 
Rest During 21 17 13 1g 22 ±1 15 26 2Q 2Q 2Q 1{ 
Day 
Eating 11 16 29 18 17 27 23 18 35 28 14 28 31 28 2\ 
Moving 40 89 84 71 44 46 49 4o 42 40 42 4l 4l 39 39 4; 
5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 i; 
Time During Day 

PDF PAGE 78
an Activity Each Half-hour 
Day 
7_7_2434225-
3 11 12 18 12 11 16 7 8 11 7 11 
J 13 18 22 11 15 26 20 20 20 l8 12 
7 27 23 18 35 28 14 28 31 28 27 33 
5 49 4o 42 40 42 4l 4l 39 39 ^3 44 
3 9 10 11 12 13 
Dusk Night 
30 67 100 
323235373 
9 12 674622-4 
11 19 9 13 16 10 9 17 
39 29 35 28 34 43 40 33 30 
38 38 47 50 43 36 46 41 37 29 
14 15 16 17 18 19 
Time During Day 

PDF PAGE 79
69 
Capuchins, on arising, moved away from the trees, in which 
they slept, and started to feed almost immediately. The amount 
of time spent moving was probably lower, and the amount of 
time spent eating probably higher, than was indicated by the 
few observations made between 0600 and 0700. Eating, on the 
average, occupied about 23$ of the time between dawn and 1300, 
whereas after this it increased to 34$ of the time. Rest 
periods were most frequent between 1100 and 1300, and after 
this they occurred less frequently than in the early morning. 
Observations of captive Cebus albifrons showed that rest 
periods occurred generally at mid-day (Bernstein, 1965). Allo-
grooming occurred most frequently between 0730 and 1100. It 
was somewhat less frequent between 1130 and 1430, and occurred 
at a very low level from 1500 until dusk. The increase in 
feeding and decrease in resting and allogrooming in late 
afternoon, may reflect an effort on the part of the capuchins 
to become satiated before retiring for the night. 
Three points should be mentioned about movement of Cebus 
groups on Barro Colorado Island. First, the members of the 
groups usually spread out so that, from the air, the group 
might look like a long, ragged and sometimes fragmented column. 
There were some routes that the monkeys followed, such as 
along certain valleys and ridges, but different paths were 
used by different individuals each day. There were no 
specific trees, or branches of trees, to which they were 
limited. Some individuals might come down and move on the 
ground, while others took various pathways through the trees 

PDF PAGE 80
70 
and branches. "This differs from the observations made by 
Kuhlhorn (1939), of Cebus apella groups on the southern 
Matto Grasso of Brazil, or at least from the interpretation 
usually placed on them (Hill, i960, p. 385). Ktihlhorn's 
description gives one the impression that members of the 
group follow very specific routes through the canopy of the 
gallery forest, but his description is very general in nature. 
Chapman's observations (1938) of capuchins on Barro Colorado 
Island were similar to my own. He stated that the monkeys 
might travel at a fairly rapid rate over branches that they 
had never used before. 
The second point concerns the order of progression. 
Juveniles, subadult males and adult females were often the 
first to leave food or rest trees and thus were foremost in 
the line or lines of progression. The old males were fre­
quently towards the rear of the groups during movement, 
because they were the last to arise from sleep or rest. 
Females with young frequently stayed near or in the vicinity 
of the old male(s). Thus, the order of progression as observed 
by Kuhlhorn (1939) in Cebus apella (juveniles of both sexes, 
adult females and males, females with young, and the old 
male) does hold true for Cebus of Barro Colorado Island, 
but the ordering of individuals was fluid. The position of 
an animal during progression was not determined by its 
position in a dominance structure, as it is in the ground-
living chacma baboon (Hall and DeVore, 1965). 

PDF PAGE 81
71 
The third point regarding movement through the forest, 
was that any individual or individuals capable of independent 
movement might become separated from the group. Separation 
is probably initiated by the fact that white-faced monkeys 
moved at different rates, fed in different trees, and might 
eventually head off in different directions or be left behind. 
When individuals became aware that they were separated, long 
distance contact calls (see below) were given and fragments 
of the group reassembled. Usually one fragment of the group 
remained stationary, while the other searched for and found 
it. Either the moving or stationary fragment might contain 
the old male or males. If several individuals were lost or 
separated, there usually were one or more adult females 
with them. 
Rest periods varied greatly in length. The longest 
rest period that I observed lasted about one hour. The old 
male or males might sleep for most of the period, even 
while being groomed by other members of the group. Adult 
females usually spent the initial part of the rest period 
allogrooming and autogrooming, while subadult males and 
juveniles tended to play (see below). Infants started to 
explore their surroundings during this time, to interact 
with other members of the group (see below), and to suckle 
from and be groomed by their mothers. During the last part 
of the rest period most members of the group slept. More 
allogrooming was done by the adult females as the rest 
period terminated, and they might be delayed in starting to 

PDF PAGE 82
72 
feed. If the rest period was short, it might consist mainly 
of play and allogrooming, with only a few of the older animals 
actually resting. 
Play, which will be described below, was most vigorously 
engaged in by subadult males. Midmorning and late afternoon 
rest periods were sometimes totally devoted to play by these 
individuals. Juveniles and year-old infants tried to join in 
at times. 
Dusk falls very quickly (between 1800 and 1900, depending 
on season of year), so that Cebus usually would start to settle 
down while there was still full light. Fully-leaved tall 
trees, sometimes up to 100 feet high were chosen as sleeping 
trees for the night. When the white-faced monkeys were 
feeding in an area with low trees late in the afternoon, a 
period of rapid travel occurred just before dusk until some 
tall trees were reached. Once these trees were reached, the 
monkeys moved upwards and disappeared from sight. During 
the next 15 to 20 minutes, some of the animals shifted their 
positions, and one or two animals might even shift back and 
forth between trees. By the time the forest floor was dark, 
the monkeys were quiet, even though there'might be light in 
the canopy for another 5 to 10 minutes. I did not hear 
vocalizations or movement from Cebus after dark. Observations 
made on captive Cebus albifrons suggested that this species 
was not active at night unless disturbed (Bernstein, 1965). 

PDF PAGE 83
73 
When the first light appeared in the morning (varied 
seasonally between 0530 and 0630), and while the forest 
floor was still dark, the monkeys started to leave the trees. 
It was very hard to see the animals among the dark leaves, 
so that I do not know which animals initiated the move. 

PDF PAGE 84
74 
BODY GESTURES, FACIAL EXPRESSIONS, AND VOCALIZATIONS 
Body Gestures and Tactile Stimulation 
Capuchins use various means to communicate with each 
other within a group, with other groups, and with other 
species. A description follows of the behavior patterns 
that were observed during this study. Most of these patterns 
were performed by free-living monkeys,but some were observed 
only in captive animals. 
Chasing and "Running" Away 
Two animals gallop, one after the other, across the 
ground, or across branches. They may jump from tree to tree, 
climb up or down trees, drop to the ground, and dash back 
up the trees. All of this movement occurs quickly, and one 
or both of the animals may fall in the process. Chasing 
may be interrupted by periods when the individuals ignore 
each other, or wrestle (see below). At times the positions 
may change and the chased become the chaser. 
Wrestling 
Two individuals grapple with arms and legs. They try 
to obtain a hold on each other with their jaws (see mouthing 
and biting below). If they are on a branch, one or both 
of them attempts to make the other lose its balance, so that 
it will release its grip and fall. 

PDF PAGE 85
75 
Mouthing 
The jaws are closed on some part of another animal, 
usually while wrestling. There is no apparent attempt to 
inflict damage. 
Biting 
This behavior pattern was only observed in captive 
monkeys, but one wound was seen in the wild that probably 
resulted from a bite by another Cebus. Usually the upper 
canine of one side is inserted into the flesh on one of the 
extremities of another animal. The head is pulled away 
quickly, and the canine tooth drawn down, or across the limb, 
producing a deep gash. 
Warning Bite 
One monkey takes an arm or a leg of another in its 
hand, and brings the extremity to its mouth. The jaws are 
closed firmly on the extremity, and the owner pulls or jerks 
back quickly. No damage is done. 
Self Bite 
An animal places its own forearm in its mouth and closes 
its jaws. This was only observed in captive animals. It 
was done by an adult female when she was harrassed by a 
juvenile female, although the adult also gave warning bites. 
This seems to occur when an animal can not otherwise vent 
its frustration. This behavior can be considered redirected 

PDF PAGE 86
76 
aggression, but towards oneself, rather than toward a third 
individual or an inanimate object. 
Hit 
One animal swings its arm forward or backward at another. 
Push 
An individual uses its hand to push another away. 
Tail or Leg Pulling 
While one Cebus tries to move away, another pulls it 
back or down by grabbing the tail or leg. 
Tagging 
The arm of one monkey is stretched out toward another, 
usually while the two are facing each other. If the second 
monkey looks up, the first animal quickly withdraws its arm 
and brings its hand to rest on the substratum. Sometimes 
both animals will extend their arms in quick succession, and 
the hands will touch or grasp briefly. The object of this 
activity seems to be to touch or grab hold of the other's 
body, and it may be a preliminary step to wrestling. 
Threat Posture 
One animal stands on all fours and stares at another 
monkey, or at a human (Fig. 13). This may be accompanied 
by an open-mouth threat (see facial expressions below), 
bouncing or branch shaking (see below). A similar position, 

PDF PAGE 87
77 
Figure 13. Pug, the active old male of group B 
in threat posture. He lacks the white flame 
on the forehead of other old males, but does 
have the large build and square face. 

PDF PAGE 88
78 
"Arch Posture" has been described for Callicebus (Moynihan, 
1966). 
Bouncing 
A Cebus faces another monkey or a human, while standing 
on all fours (see threat position above). It then raises 
and lowers the body and head several times on its legs. The 
arms are held stiffly beneath, with the palms directed down­
ward, so that when the hands are lowered the substratum is 
struck or slapped. Usually the hands remain in contact with 
the substratum, while the head and chest moved up and down. 
If the monkey is standing on a small branch, the hands and 
feet retain their grip on the branch, and the branch moves up 
and down, in synchrony with the shoulders and head of the 
animal (see branch shaking below). This is similar to "Bobs 
head (and thorax) toward" in rhesus monkeys (see Altmann, 
1962). 
Branch or Tree Shaking 
One type of branch shaking has been described above. 
Another type occurs when a monkey stands and rapidly pushes 
or pulls on a branch or trunk of a tree, setting that part 
of the tree in motion. The branch or trunk may break off. 
Branch shaking is also reported for rhesus (Altmann, 1962), 
the mountain gorilla (Schaller, 1963), chimpanzees (Reynolds 
and Reynolds, 1965), the red spider monkey (Carpenter, 1935), 
and others (see Marler, 1965), in aggressive situations.-

PDF PAGE 89
79 
Branch Breaking and Dropping 
Branches are broken off, as above, or are pushed or 
pulled with one or both arms, or legs, or are pulled off 
with tail. Green branches that are snapped, are sometimes 
chewed at the base so that the remaining attachments are cut 
and the branch can fall. Free pieces of wood entangled in 
vines or branches, are shaken loose. Sometimes a branch 
that has been broken off and caught in lower branches, is 
followed and shaken loose again. 
This behavior usually occurs when an individual has 
been disturbed by the presence of other groups of Cebus, or 
another animal such as man. Usually the monkey is facing 
away from the source of the disturbance, and it may be out 
of sight. The branch is dropped after it has been broken 
off, or it may be carried a few feet towards or away from 
the source of the disturbance. When being carried a branch 
is held with the mouth, with one of the hands or feet, or 
with the tip of the tail. The sound of snapping branches is 
usually enough to excite the other monkeys, particularly 
when two groups have come in contact. 
Tooth Grinding 
Subadult or adult males grind the premolar and molar 
teeth together, by moving the jaws from side to side. This 
is usually done while the animal is facing a source of dis­
turbance, such as a male from another group, or a human. 
Moynihan (1966) has observed "gnashing" of teeth in Callicebus 

PDF PAGE 90
8o 
where it seems to have at least some hostile components. 
Ateles also has been observed doing this in an act called 
"champing" (Eisenberg and Kuehn, 1966). 
Looking At 
One animal looks at another, or at a human. This prob­
ably only indicates interest, but at times may also convey 
a certain amount of threat. [See looking away (below), and 
threat position (above).] 
Looking Away 
This response was observed when I stared or looked at 
a monkey. The individual would turn its head away, or 
eventually might even move away to a position behind some 
leaves. This suggests that the monkeys are disturbed by being 
stared at. The monkeys were not observed to use stares, or 
prolonged looks as means of communication. 
Head Shake 
The head is moved rapidly from side to side, while the 
animal frowns and grins (see facial expressions below). Gut-
teral chatter is emitted at the same time (see vocalizations 
below). The head shake is evoked when an animal approaches, 
or is with another individual of which it is slightly afraid. 
The second individual ignores or makes no response to the 
head shaker. Nolte (1958) suggested that this is a greeting 
movement in Cebus apella; however, the situations that she 
described suggests that the animals probably only did it to 

PDF PAGE 91
81 
humans they were slightly afraid of—to strangers, and to 
male humans. Head shaking has also been observed in Ateles, 
where "it accompanies an initial contact or a renewed contact 
where the animal is ambivalent in its approach"(Eisenberg 
and Kuehn, 1966). Moynihan (1966) mentions head shaking in 
a captive Callicebus moloch male. For further discussion, 
see gutteral chatter below. 
Tail-Rump Waggle 
This is a rapid lateral movement of the tail, and some­
times the rump. It is usually performed by an animal that 
has been prevented from approaching, or that has just been 
chased away. While doing the tail-rump waggle the animal 
faces the individual that it wishes to approach, or the one 
that has just chased it. The waggle may be accompanied by 
trills (see vocalizations below). The waggle most likely 
indicates a desire on the part of the monkey to approach, 
but also a tendency to flee. In the wild the animal usually 
left after waggling. Waggling may be done in other situations 
where the animal has been thwarted. Nolte (1958) observed 
waggling in Cebus apella, when the animal was excited, or 
happy. "Tail-lashing" has been described in Callicebus 
during hostile behavior, and Moynihan (1966) suggested that 
this is part of the threat behavior of that species. 
Hump-up 
Subadult and adult males were observed several times 
displaying this pattern. The head is pressed against slightly 

PDF PAGE 92
82 
raised shoulders, while the animal prances or walks forward. 
I observed an immature male coatimundi doing somewhat the 
same thing when it approached a spider monkey that had come 
to the laboratory clearing. From a frontal view, both species 
looked a bit larger or stronger to the human observer. This 
may be an expression of self-confidence, but I did not observe 
it enough times to understand its behavioral significance. 
It may function as an intimidation display, as does chest-
beating in the gorilla (Schaller, 1963). 
Kneading of the Skin 
A captive Cebus infant that rode around on my shoulders, 
would open and close the grip of one of his hands on my 
skin when disturbed. Disturbances were caused by the approach 
of other humans, or when someone tried to remove him from my 
shoulders. It is possible that an infant might signal its 
mother in this way, when disturbed by another monkey. 
Solicit to Be Groomed 
A monkey, regardless of age or sex, approaches another 
and sits or lies in front of it or at its side. If they are 
facing each other, the monkey soliciting grooming holds 
its head up or to one side and averts the eyes (Fig. 14). 
If the monkey is lying down, it may present its back or belly, 
but then stares at the ground, or off into the distance. 
During allogrooming, the groomer may stop grooming and turn 
its head or whole body away. This is usually followed by 

PDF PAGE 93
Figure 14. One adult female grooming another: Ocean at 
left grooming 3 Fingers' neck. Mote that 
3 Fingers has turned head away, and averted 
her eyes. oa 

PDF PAGE 94
84 
the initial groomee then grooming the initial groomer. 
Reciprocal grooming may occur in this way several times during 
one session. This, at least in part, corresponds to "grooming 
solicitation" as described for Ateles (Eisenberg and Kuehn, 
1966). 
Hugging 
This is performed by young Cebus in the wild. Two 
individuals approach and embrace front to front. One may 
lower its head under the chest of the other, possibly to 
sniff or inspect the genitalia. Chirps are usually emitted 
by the younger animal during the embrace (see vocalizations 
below). This is similar to the "embrace" of Ateles (Eisenberg 
and Kuehn, 1966); however, hugging is limited to infant and 
juvenile Cebus, whereas embracing is performed by adult 
Ateles (pers. obs.). 
Checking for Food 
When one individual is eating, another animal of any 
age or sex may approach and position its face next to the 
face of the one that is eating. Usually the eater makes no 
response, or it may turn away. The checker leaves after a 
few moments. Nolte (1958) observed this in captive Cebus 
apella and states that it was accompanied by lip smacking. 
I did not observe lip smacking in the wild. 

PDF PAGE 95
85 
Stealing 
Older infants sometimes approach adult animals of either 
sex and make efforts to grab some portion of the food being 
held in the hands of the adult, while the adult is eating. 
Adults usually respond by turning away from the infant. In 
spite of this, the infant is frequently able to grab some 
food, after which it moves or runs away. The infant may 
make trills on the initial approach (see vocalizations below). 
Assistance Position 
While one animal is in the threat posture (see above), 
and is facing another, a third individual may "help" it. The 
third individual may stand at the threatener's side and drape 
an arm across its shoulder, or it may partly or completely 
rest its chest on the back of the threatener (see Figs. 15 
and 16). The threatener may bounce while the third individual 
assists (see bouncing above) and frequently will display an 
open-mouth threat (see facial expressions below). The 
assisting animal may also give an open-mouth threat, but 
usually it is not as pronounced (Figs. 15 and 16). Similar 
behavior has been observed in captive Cebus albifrons 
(Bernstein, 1965). 
Riding on the Back or Shoulders 
Newborn infants ride diagonally across the shoulders 
of the mother until they are a month old or older. An in­
fant may have its left arm around its mother's neck, and 

PDF PAGE 96
Figure 15. Old male of group B in partial "assistance" position, right arm 
placed across back of adult female, while both threaten observer, 
The large size of the male's lower right canine, and the square 
shape of his face can be compared with the small canines of the 
female and her oval face. The female's forehead has elongate 
black hairs on the temples and a black soike in the center. 
CO 

PDF PAGE 97
I 
Figure 16. Old male, Pug, of group B, in full 
"assistance" position, with chest against 
back of juvenile, and left arm pressing 
against juvenile's left side, while 
juvenile threatens observer. 

PDF PAGE 98
88 
its left leg and tail under its mother's left axilla. The 
right hand and foot of the infant grasp the fur on its 
mother's back (Fig. 17). An infant may also face in the 
opposite direction, the positions of its limbs being reversed. 
During the 4th to 5th week of life an infant alternates 
between riding diagonally on the shoulders and riding straight 
on the mother's back, with arms held behind the mother's 
shoulders (Fig. 18). This change in position is brought about 
by the increased strength and size of the infant which can 
now hold onto its mother's back with the hind legs. By the 
time the infant is 3 months old it is long enough the wrap 
the tip of its tail around the base of the mother's tail for 
additional support. 
The diagonal position on the shoulders was also used by 
an infant Cebus apella until it was 3 weeks old (Nolte and 
Dtfcker, 1959)• Thereafter it clung length-wise to the back 
of the mother. Nolte and DUcker (1959) suggested that the 
diagonal position was used by the infant because it was 
the position into which the infant returned after suckling. 
However, it seems more likely to me that the positions are 
correlated with the degree of development, strength, and 
the overall length of the infant. 
Male Mounting and Thrusting 
A male keeps his feet in contact with the substratum 
throughout this activity. He uses one hand to hold or pull 
the female's tail to one side, while wrapping the other 

PDF PAGE 99
Figure 17. Natasha riding across shoulders of her mother, 3 Fingers, 
at one day of age. Notice the dark forehead of the infant. CO 

PDF PAGE 100
Figure 18. Natasha riding parallel on her mother's back at 53 days of a^e, 
Notice the infant's white forehead and the start of a black 
spike, as well as the center- and right temple lines down 
the forehead of 3 Finders, the mother. vo o 

PDF PAGE 101
91 
arm around her waist. During this activity a female stands 
on all fours. In this position, the male executes six or 
more thrusts in less than half a minute, and then releases 
the female. While the male thrusts, the female may curl 
her tail around his back. 
Invitation to Copulate 
Mounting and thrusting by the male may be preceded by 
similar behavior on the part of the female. In these in­
stances, the female stands behind the male and executes 
pelvic thrusting movements. If the male is sitting, the 
female sits behind him and they appear to execute pushups 
together. This may continue for about 30 seconds or longer. 
If the male moves away during this time, the female may ride 
around on his back (cage observation). Howlers also exhibit 
precopulatory behavior, in the form of rhythmic tongue move­
ments (Carpenter, 1934). Copulation is sometimes preceded 
by sniffing at the genital region in Callicebus, but displays 
are usually absent (Moynihan, 1966). Captive Ateles may go 
through a long procedure of displays of pelvic thrusting 
and tactile stimulation (Eisenberg and Kuehn, 1966). 
Urine Rubbing 
See previous section on body care. 

PDF PAGE 102
92 
Displacement Scratching 
At times when a monkey was watching me, it would scratch 
itself on the shoulders or legs, particularly if I were 
looking back at it. It is possible that this autogrooming 
is evoked by a mild conflict between tendencies to approach 
or flee; however, it could also be considered natural grooming. 
Moynihan (1966) has described displacement scratching in 
Callicebus. Further study will be needed to interpret this 
behavior. (See description of autogrooming in previous 
section.) 
Piloerection 
I was never sure that Cebus erected their hair, but it 
is one of the ways in which adult males could make themselves 
appear larger (Fig. 13). Nolte (1958) observed that a captive 
Cebus apella erected its hair while exhibiting a tail-rump 
waggle. Piloerection has been observed in Ateles, when they 
are excited (Eisenberg and Kuehn, 1966) and in Callicebus 
during hostile behavior (Moynihan, 1966). 
Facial Expressions 
In the forest, only six general facial expressions or 
fragments of facial expressions were observed. Two additional 
facial expressions were observed in captive animals. Much 
detailed work has been done on facial expressions of primates 
in general by Hooff (1967) and by Andrew (1963). 

PDF PAGE 103
93 
Basic Face 
The mouth is closed, eyes open, and the eye brows neither 
raised nor lowered. The faces of the adult and infant in 
Fig. 18 are examples of this. Hooff (I967) has referred to 
this as the "relaxed face." 
Searching Frown 
When looking for something nearby a Cebus usually frowns 
(see Figs. 7a and 19). Andrew (1963) suggested that such 
frowns help the animal to see close objects. 
Grin 
The mouth is closed or barely open, and the mouth corners 
drawn back. Whether the lips are parted or not parted, the 
jaws are closed. The eyes are open and the eye brows are 
lowered into a frown. Sometimes a lateral head shake and 
a vocalization (gutteral chatter) accompanies this facial 
expression. The animal engaged in these activities is looking 
at, and may be approaching or sitting with, a dominant in­
dividual. The dominant individual ignores the animal dis­
playing the grin. Darwin (1965, p. 132) mentioned that this 
face is made by Cebus apella and Cebus capucinus and that 
the grin is probably related to the human smile, which in 
man indicates joy and pleasure. Nolte (1958) and Andrew 
(1963) have also stated that the grin and head shake in Cebus 
is a friendly greeting. However, I believe that the grin, 
with or without the frown or head shake, indicates that the 

PDF PAGE 104
• i-y-^i^resr-reyyq^ .tJ Tl^iaCTB 
94 
Figure 19, Juvenile female grooming adult male 
intently. Note that the male has turned 
head and eyes away and has protruded 
tip of tongue. 

PDF PAGE 105
95 
individual wishes to approach or remain, but that it is 
afraid. The grin was alleged to be a submissive expression 
in rhesus (Kaufmann, 1966). The lateral head shake may 
indicate a tendency on the part of the animal to flee. Hooff 
(1967) has described two similar faces, "silent bared-teeth 
face" and the "bared-teeth gecker face." In both faces the 
eye brows are either relaxed or raised in contrast to the 
lowered position observed in Cebus. Moynihan (1966) has also 
described a "baring the teeth" face in Callicebus which is 
similar to the Cebus grin except that the mouth corners are 
not retracted. 
Open-Mouth Threat 
The mouth is open and the mouth corners retracted so 
at least the tips of the canines are exposed (Figs. 15 and 
16). The eyes are opened wide and the eye brows raised. In 
the forest, warning calls (see below) are sometimes emitted, 
whereas captive animals that are cornered will emit screams. 
The animal making the open-mouth threat may bounce or shake 
a branch. When a second animal assists, it rarely opens its 
mouth as widely (Figs, 15 and 16). The open-mouth threat 
is interpreted to indicate mainly a tendency to attack, but 
since the animal is holding its position, there is also a 
high level of fear. When in a cage with a Cebus making open-
mouth threat, one can best avoid being attacked by staring 
back with a relaxed face. If one responds with an open mouth 
or turns away, the monkey most likely will attack. Hooff 

PDF PAGE 106
96 
(1967) described several facial expressions that fit in part, 
"staring open-mouth face" and "staring bared-teeth scream 
face." A similar facial expression has been described for 
Ateles,and has been called a "grimace" (Eisenberg and Kuehn, 
1966). Carpenter (1934) also described a juvenile howler 
baring its teeth before rushing and biting another howler. 
Open-mouth 
Animals during play will open their mouths widely and 
partly retract the mouth corners, while not showing their 
teeth. While engaged in wrestling, capuchins keep their mouths 
opened, each applying its mouth to the other as though biting 
(Fig. 20), A similar face, the "relaxed open-mouth face," 
has been described for other primate species during play 
(Hooff, 1967). 
Yawning 
In this act, an animal starts to open its mouth, with 
the lips constricted to form a-circular opening. The opening 
gradually widens until the mouth is opened maximally. At 
this point, the lips are retracted, both horizontally and 
vertically, and all the teeth are visible. The yawn in Cebus 
seems to be merely a comfort movement and not associated with 
a behavioral transaction between conspecifics. 
Tongue Tip Exposed 
This expression was observed only in certain caged 
specimens of Cebus. The tip of the tongue was slightly 

PDF PAGE 107
^ 
».v ***•' 
A -
IM* iSfrT^./ "<-•% ^Tj 
1 > n 
*"; * 
VA o f %T 
r ••*©•*•':. *' 
*•#" • • > 
*v >« 
Figure 20. Play: Gray Horns, a 3 year old male, hanging by tail and about 
to grip tail with left foot for support, is ready to grab year 
old infant stretching up to him. Note that both have mouths 
open wide. 

PDF PAGE 108
98 
protruded between the lips, usually by an animal being groomed 
or grooming another (Fig. 19). This expression is character­
istic of a calm monkey, but its function under natural cir­
cumstances is not known. 
Protruded Lips 
In displaying this expression, a capuchin's mouth was 
closed, or almost so, and its lips were extended, and almost 
meeting. This expression was only seen in captive animals 
during allogrooming. I once observed an adult male with lips 
protruding, approaching a female to copulate. Moynihan (1966) 
described a similar face for Callicebus moloch, and Hooff 
(1967) discussed a "Protruded lips face" in other primates. 
Ateles also has a similar facial expression, which is alleged 
to promote contact between individuals (Eisenberg and Kuehn, 
1966). 
Vocalizations 
Several investigators have given incomplete descriptions 
of the vocalizations of Cebus. Some of this work has been 
done on captive Cebus apella (Nolte, 1958); other reports 
are from studies of wild populations (Hill, i960, p. 392; 
KUhlhorn, 1939). Chapman (1938) and Enders (1935) both made 
notes on the vocalizations of Cebus capucinus on Barro 
Colorado Island. Tembrock (1963) has reported the principle 
frequencies for a few vocalizations emitted by the four 
species of Cebus; however, he did not know the function of 
the calls, nor did he identify them sufficiently. 

PDF PAGE 109
99 
Most of my recordings were obtained in the forest, al­
though some recordings of captive animals were made. The 
recording equipment I used was sensitive to a frequency range 
of between 70 and 14,000 Hz, and most of the vocalizations 
recorded were within this range. Sonagraphs were made with 
a Kay Missilizer at two different record frequency ranges: 
50 to 5000 Hz, and 150 to 15,000 Hz. (The data below will 
be presented in Kilohertz, where one KHz = 1,000 cps.) Ten 
basic vocalizations were defined for the white-faced monkey. 
Some of the calls appear to be related both by function and 
by physical structure. 
There are four basic contact calls, and five situations 
in which they are used. 
Chirp 
This call was emitted by wild and captive Cebus aged 
from about one month to two years. It was usually given 
once or twice while two young animals were hugging or in 
contact. It might serve to prolong the contact or embrace 
between the two individuals. The call was short in duration 
and dropped rapidly from 5 KHz to under 1 KHz. Chirps 
occurred by themselves (Fig. 21, upper row), or they ter­
minated a purr or trill (Fig. 21, middle row). 
Yip 
This call was given by individuals of all ages. It 
was emitted in the wild by a 4-day old individual when it 
was reaching for a nipple to suckle. Yips were given much 

PDF PAGE 110
Cebus capucinus Cebus apella 
E 
u 
5 
o 
Ul 
5r 
4 
3 
2 
I 
Ateles geoffroyi Alouatta villoso 
6 
4 
3 
2 
I 
5 
4 
3 
2 
I 
Saguinus geotrroyi 
15 r 
10 
TIME IN SECONDS 
Figure 21. Vocalizations of Cebus capucinus, 
o o 

PDF PAGE 111
101 
more frequently, by 4-month old infants starting to leave 
their mothers during group rest periods. Infants called 
repeatedly while out of contact with their mothers. The yip 
call might continue after an infant returned and made contact. 
The infant stopped yipping when its mother groomed it, or 
allowed it to suckle, but resumed yipping if its mother 
stopped either of these activities. In this context the call 
seems to have two functions. One is to maintain contact with 
the mother when the infant wanders about within visual range 
of her. The second function seems to be to elicit maternal 
behavior such as grooming or nursing when the infant is in 
contact or within reach (see also Group Cohesion call below). 
Yips were of short duration and were given singly, or several 
in a row. The predominant frequencies ranged between 1 KHz 
and 4 KHz, and there was a sharp rise at the end of the call 
(Fig. 21, top row). 
Huh 
Infants and Juveniles, capable of independent movement, 
emit this call when the animal is hesitant about moving. 
The reason for the hesitation might be a gap between two 
trees that was too large to jump. The call might also be 
given because an animal was prevented in some other way 
from staying with individuals it could see moving ahead. 
The huh call was repeated one to five times and often was 
emitted as a triplet. In one situation a 4-month old infant, 
just starting to become independent, was following its 

PDF PAGE 112
102 
mother. It became isolated in a tree from which it could 
not or would not jump. The infant uttered triplet, quadruplet, 
and quintuplet huhs, and as the mother disappeared among the 
trees ahead, the infant shifted into an "arrawh" call (dis­
cussed below). The mother dashed back to the infant which 
mounted its mother's back, and both of them rejoined the 
group ahead. Juveniles that made the call received no help, 
and eventually jumped or found another route. The call was 
short in duration and had a fundamental frequency and harmonics 
composed of narrow frequency bands. It was modulated and 
dropped in frequencies at the end. The major frequencies of 
the huh call occurred between 0.5 KHz and 3.0 KHz (Fig. 21, 
upper row). 
Group Cohesion Call 
This call was a combination of yips and huhs that were 
emitted while individuals were eating either in the same or 
in different trees. The third sonogram in Fig. 21 shows a 
single yip followed by three huhs. The call might also be 
given when an animal approached a food source, or when it 
left a food source, such as a tree. The call seems to have 
two functions. One is to enable an individual to maintain 
contact with other members of the group, when its visual 
attention appears to be concentrated on eating. The second 
function of the call may be to indicate a nearby food source 
to other members of the group. 

PDF PAGE 113
103 
Arrawh 
This call was emitted when an individual, or group of 
individuals had lost visual and auditory contact with other 
group members. The call was loud and long, and was given 
from one to five times. Usually, the call was made in 
triplets. If it was not answered by the other members of 
the group, the call was given in quadruplets or quintuplets. 
If still unanswered, the caller started to move very rapidly 
through the trees until it eventually came close enough to 
reestablish auditory contact with the group. When members 
of a group first heard this call from a distant Cebus, they 
responded with huhs, trills, chortles, or screams in addition 
to or sometimes instead of, the louder arrawh call. Sub­
sequent responses consisted only of arrawhs. The calls were 
repeated back and forth until the lost member or section, 
had rejoined the group. At times, a juvenile suddenly finding 
itself alone might give the call. This arrawh call might 
be ignored if the group were only a few trees away, but after 
several repetitions it might be answered. Most of the 
second and all of the third unit of a triplet arrawh call 
is illustrated at the end of the top row of Fig. 21. Fig. 
22, top row, shows a nearly complete triplet call. Note the 
very rapid rise in the frequencies at the start of the call. 
Most of the energy of the call is in a single frequency 
band at about 1 KHz. More will be said about this call 
below. 

PDF PAGE 114
104 
The next group of calls to be presented differ from 
one another in their functions, but all indicate fear on 
the part of the caller. 
Purr 
I only heard this call from captive animals, as it 
was very low in intensity. It was given when two animals 
were in contact and usually hugging. It appears to mean that 
the caller is mildly afraid. The purr could be interpreted 
by the other animal as indicating absence of hostile inten­
tions, or that the caller is friendly. The call may thus 
function to prolong contact. Some purrs were terminated by 
chirps (see above). The purr is a pulsed call with most 
energy at frequencies between 8 and 10 KHz (Fig. 21, middle 
row). 
Trill 
This call is frequently given when a Cebus follows, 
approaches, or remains with an older or more dominant in­
dividual. It may be emitted after a young Cebus has been 
chased away, or it may be produced by several individuals 
that have been left behind, while the older animals are 
interacting with another group. Trills may also be emitted 
by an adult in combination with gutteral chatter (see below). 
It indicates fear on the part of the caller, but may also 
be interpreted as a begging call. An older animal may allow 
the caller to approach, to suckle, to steal some food, to 
remain on its back, or it may groom the caller. The call 

PDF PAGE 115
105 
in all cases appears to signify a lack of hostile intentions 
and may be considered as friendly, or as a contact promoter. 
It is similar in function and in its pulsed structure to the 
purr, but is much louder. The major energy of the trill is 
in a narrow frequency band at about 2 KHz, although there 
may be some harmonics above this frequency (Fig. 21, middle 
and bottom rows). 
Whistle 
Whistles seem to be made in situations similar to those 
evoking trills, but they are also emitted during short con­
flicts with other individuals. This call appears to indicate 
a high level of fear on the part of the caller, and may 
function as a submissive call. However, more observations 
are needed to support this interpretation. The major energy 
in this call lies between 5 and 10 KHz, and it may be composed 
of one or more narrow frequency bands of long duration, 
(Fig. 21, middle row). 
Gutteral Chatter 
This call was given by adult females with recently 
born infants on their backs, and by animals, that were fol­
lowing, approaching, or grooming the dominant males of the 
group. Trills were often made at the same time. The old 
males ignored the callers, or at least showed no overt 
response to them. The call indicates a high level of 
fear on the part of the caller, but also demonstrates 

PDF PAGE 116
106 
a lack of hostile intentions. A monkey might make grins and 
head shakes while emitting gutteral chatters and trills, all 
of which might indicate that the individual was submissive 
or friendly. The gutteral chatter was pulsed with most of 
its energy ranging in a wide band below 2 KHz. There was no 
high frequency component in the gutteral chatter, as was 
found in the trill (Fig. 21, bottom row). Gutteral chatter 
might grade into trills, or vice versa. Gutteral chatter 
might also change into chatter-scream and then into scream. 
Scream 
This vocalization is given by an individual that is 
being attacked or otherwise threatened by a conspecific, or 
another species. Caged individuals that were unable to escape 
were more likely to scream than animals in the wild. Screams 
were also emitted by one or more individuals when they first 
became aware of the presence of another group. Screams in­
dicate a very high level of fear on the part of the caller. 
Their function, however, is to draw attention and possibly 
aid from other individuals. Screams appear to be merged 
pulses with the major energy concentrated in a wide frequency 
band between 2 and 3 KHz (Fig. 21, bottom row). The scream 
may develop out of chatter-scream (longer intervals between 
pulses), which is, in turn, an intermediate form between 
scream and gutteral chatter (above). 
The last two main types of calls are alarm or warning 
calls. These calls are longer in duration than the pulses 

PDF PAGE 117
107 
of the fear calls, and they may be given once or several 
times in a row. 
Chortle 
Old males and adult females were most likely to give 
this call. It was given by a threatened animal holding its 
ground, or by the old male of the group when he charged 
toward another group at the start of a territorial encounter. 
It may function as a warning call, or as a challenge to another 
individual or group. The energy of the call is in two fre­
quency bands, the main one between 1 and 2 KHz, and the other 
between 4 and 5 KHz (Fig. 21, bottom row). Chortles may be 
accompanied by screams or gyrrahs. 
Gyrrah 
This call was given when one or more capuchins were 
disturbed by the presence of another species on the ground, 
such as a human, a tapir, or a boa constrictor. The call 
was repeated several times by an individual and it might be 
given by other individuals afterwards. If some capuchins 
were on the ground when the call was given, they dashed up 
trees and then looked around. After the initial gyrrah calls 
several individuals might congregate above the source of 
disturbance, e.g., a snake, emit gyrrahs, and jump from one 
branch to another for a short period. If the source of dis­
turbance was a human, one or two individuals would continue 
to make gyrrahs, while the rest of the group disappeared. 

PDF PAGE 118
108 
Eventually the individuals making the gyrrahs would stop and 
quietly disappear. The call indicates that the animal is 
alarmed, but serves several different functions. The first 
is to warn initially the other monkeys of the presence of 
danger. The second function is to localize the danger* and 
the third is to attract the attention of the source of danger 
to one or two monkeys while the rest of the group escapes. 
The main energy of the gyrrah, lies in a wide frequency band 
below 2 KHz (Fig. 21, bottom row). 
Bird Gyrrah 
This was actually the same call behaviorally and 
physically as the gyrrah call, but it was only given once 
by any one individual. It was evoked by a fast-moving bird 
overhead. Other individuals may repeat the call, but again 
they only gave it once. Frequently the monkey or monkeys 
in the upper branches would fall or jump to the branches 
below after the call had been given. On Barro Colorado Island 
this was done when vultures or large black-colored hawks 
flew swiftly over the canopy. These birds made no attempts 
to attack Cebus; however, there are three species of large 
eagles, whose distributions coincide with that of the genus 
Cebus in Central and northern South America. These eagles 
prey upon medium-sized to large mammals: the harpy eagle, 
Harpia harpyja is known to include Cebus in its diet (Fowler 
and Cope, 1964); the crested eagle, Morphnus guianensis, 
is known to eat the woolly monkey which is larger than the 

PDF PAGE 119
109 
capuchin; and the solitary eagle, Harpyhaliaetus, is known 
to attack fawns (Grossman and Hamlet, 1964). Thus, the func­
tion of the call seems fairly obvious. It is probably given 
only once by an individual to prevent localization by the 
avian predator. 
The vocalizations of Cebus capucinus seem to fall into 
three behavioral groups: vocalizations that function to 
maintain contact (chirp, yip, huh, group cohesion call, and 
arrawh); vocalizations that may promote or prevent contact 
(purr, trill, whistle, gutteral chatter, and scream); and 
finally, vocalizations that serve as warning calls to other 
individuals (gyrrah, bird gyrrah, and chortle). 
Physically the vocalizations make up two or possibly only 
one graded series (Table 8). The chirp, yip, huh, and arrawh 
calls are each composed of a fundamental and a series of 
harmonics, which are narrow frequency bands and are, at 
least to some extent, frequency modulated. The purr, trill 
and whistle are composed of narrow frequency bands where 
the fundamental is stressed and the harmonics are developed 
to a lesser extent. Frequency modulation seems to be absent. 
The purr, trill, gutteral chatter, and scream are all 
pulsed vocalizations with a tendency towards a single wide 
frequency band, particularly in the gutteral chatter and 
scream. Chortles also seem to be pulsed, although the pulses 
are longer in duration and spaced further apart. The 
chortle is made up of 2 wide frequency bands, the lower band 
containing greatest energy. The gyrrah has a duration 

PDF PAGE 120
Table 8. Summary of Cebus capucinus Vocalizations 
Call 
Distance Between Caller Structure 
and Respondent of Call 
Number of Calls/ 
bout of Calling 
Relative 
Intensity 
Chirp 
Yip 
Huh 
Arrawh 
Purr 
Trill 
Whistle 
Gutteral 
Chatter 
Scream 
Gyrrah 
Chortle 
in physical contact 
near or in physical 
contact 
in visual contact 
out of visual contact, 
and sometimes initially 
out of auditory contact 
in physical contact 
near or in physical 
contact 
near or in physical 
contact 
frequency modulated 
with 
fundamental and 
harmonics 
may be freq. mod., 
fundamental and 
harmonics 
fundamental and 
some harmonics 
1 to 3 low 
one or two 
wide frequency 
bands 
1 or more in 
a series 
1 to 5 
1 or more units 
of short pulses 
or pulses 
merged 
units and pulses 
merged 
1 or a long 
series 
1 or a short 
rapid series 
medium 
medium 
high 
low 
medium 
medium 
medium 
high 
high 
high 

PDF PAGE 121
Ill 
similar to the duration of a single chortle pulse. Its wide 
frequency band corresponds somewhat to the lower frequency 
band of the chortle, and also to the frequency band of the 
gutteral chatter. 

PDF PAGE 122
112 
PATTERNS OF SOCIAL BEHAVIOR 
Sexual Behavior 
Two copulations, one copulatory attempt, and two play 
copulations were observed in the forest. Two copulations 
were observed in the captive animals. 
The first copulation observed was between a 3-year old 
male and an adult female that had given birth within the 
previous 18 hours. The female sat behind the male and dis­
played an invitation to copulate (see description above). 
Some twitters were being made, possibly by the female. After 
about 30 seconds the male got up and moved around the female, 
mounted and thrusted six or more times. The male dismounted 
and sat down again in front of the female, whereupon they 
started to do push-ups again. This continued for about 60 
seconds. The male then got up and circled through some 
trees and returned to sit in front of the female again. A 
disturbance nearby ended the sequence. The two copulations 
in the cages were between an adult male and two different 
adult females. The behavior of these two females was similar 
to that of the female described above. The second copulation 
that I observed in the forest was between another young male 
and an adult female. When I first noticed them the male 
was already thrusting, and he left after dismounting. 

PDF PAGE 123
113 
The copulatory attempt was made by a 3-year old male 
with a 3-year old female. The male moved up from behind and 
the female threw him off and ran away. An hour later, this 
same female mounted a year old Cebus and thrusted several 
times before the infant escaped. 
The invitation to copulate by adult females may be a 
normal part of the female's behavior. Two things are of 
interest. The clitoris contains a bone, or os clitoris 
(Campbell, 1966), and the clitoris looks very similar to the 
penis. It seems possible that during the female's thrusting, 
the clitoris may be used to stimulate the male as well as to 
excite the female. It is also possible that the bone in the 
pendulous clitoris, makes it easier for the male to insert 
the penis. In any case, females appear to be active in 
stimulating males to copulate. One adult female positioned 
herself in front of an adult male and moved backward under him. 
The male made no response. This female, however, was copu­
lated with by a younger male an hour later. 
Since sexual behavior was observed only once for any 
one female during this study, it is not presently possible 
to correlate sexual behavior of females with a part of the 
menstrual cycle, or even to state whether such behavior is 
cyclic in this species. 
Play Behavior 
Play behavior is of interest to many ethologists, and 
it has been discussed frequently (see Loizos, 1967). The 

PDF PAGE 124
114 
behavior of Cebus that I considered to be play will be pre­
sented here. 
An infant in its 4th week began to reach out from its 
mother's back to grab onto branches or vines. Some of these 
structures may be placed in the mouth and chewed. After the 
5th or 6th week, the infant leaves its mother during rest 
periods and explores the nearby area. This again included 
the handling and chewing of vines and branches. During the 
2nd and 3rd months of life an infant usually returned to 
its mother when another individual approached or touched it. 
At the end of the 3rd or beginning of the 4th month an infant 
started to interact with older infants. Interactions might 
begin with hugging and the open-mouth face display followed by 
gentle wrestling. By the end of the 4th month the infant 
sought older infants and young juveniles at play, but remained 
at the periphery. Older animals might pull the infant's tail 
to which it responded with an open-mouth. The infant continued 
to explore its surroundings, chewing on wood, and sometimes 
jumping around by itself in the leaves or on the ground. In 
the 5th month, young juveniles grappled mildly with the infant, 
and some of this activity might occur on the ground as well 
as in the trees. The most frequent play activity of older 
infants was to mount on the back of a 2- or 3-year old 
juvenile. The juvenile might carry the infant a few feet, 
but usually the juvenile remained in one place. Eventually 
the infant dismounted or was pulled off and the two might 
wrestle. 

PDF PAGE 125
115 
Wrestling, chasing, and mouthing become more prominent 
activities as juveniles, age, being most pronounced in 3-year 
old males. These males chased, wrestled, and mouthed each 
other during sessions lasting as long as an half-hour or more. 
Active play was interrupted by short periods, when the players 
ignored each other, and might be resumed calmly, or with a 
sudden dash or chase. Males rarely allogroomed, but during 
active .play sessions, allogrooming sometimes occurs. However, 
this grooming appeared to be a tactic used by one or both 
individuals to obtain a good position before starting to 
wrestle, i.e., it was used to momentarily appease the other 
individual. 
Much of the chasing and wrestling takes place on the 
ground, but it also shifts quickly up into the trees. As 
males approached their 4th year, one of them might do more 
of the chasing and might remain more frequently on a branch 
after the other had fallen pr dropped to the ground; how­
ever, play continued, 
Usually play involved only two animals, but others might 
join in momentarily, or play nearby. Normally, adults do 
not engage in these activities, but one adult male that had 
joined group A just 3 months previously, was observed chasing, 
wrestling, and mouthing with some of the 3-year old 
juveniles. 
Sexual behavior may occur as play. During a group rest 
period a 3-year old juvenile female mounted a year old infant 
and displayed four or five thrusts before the infant evaded. 

PDF PAGE 126
116 
This female had thrown off a male that had attempted to 
copulate with her about an hour before. 
I have classified play behavior as consisting of three 
main types of activities: exploratory, agonistic, and sexual. 
Exploratory activities function by acquainting the infant 
with its environment, and by giving it practice in moving 
around. More important than practice is the "confidence" that 
the infant acquires in its ability to negotiate difficult 
passages, or jumps of great distance. By the 5th month the 
infant starts to follow the group on its own, although the 
mother will still frequently carry or help it across large 
gaps (Fig, 4), Wrestling, chasing, and mouthing are the 
same as, or similar to, activities used during agonistic 
interactions. Here again infants learn how to interact with 
other members of the group. In addition, and more important, 
they learn who the other individuals are, and what their 
relationship to the other individuals is. It is significant 
that play is most predominant among juvenile males, and 
that an adult male that had just joined group A participated 
in chasing, wrestling, and mouthing with juvenile males. 
It is in these activities that dominance relationships, to 
the extent that they exist, appear to be established. 
Allogrooming 
Autogrooming has been described above under body care, 
but allogrooming and its social aspects will be discussed 
here. 

PDF PAGE 127
117 
Mothers groomed their infants usually while the infant 
was suckling, or after it had finished. As the infant aged 
it had to compete with other individuals which came to its 
mother for grooming. Thus the infant might use yip calls to 
gain attention from its mother, although if the mother was 
grooming another individual, she usually continued to do so. 
Most of the allogrooming in a group was done by adult 
females (Fig. 22). These females groomed each other, the 
adult and subadult males, and the young. At the opposite 
extreme, adult males received grooming from most of the in­
dividuals in the group, but they did not reciprocate. The 
adult females groomed one another, but not always equally. 
In group A, one adult female usually solicited grooming and 
was groomed, although she frequently ignored the solicitations 
of others to be groomed. Allogrooming between two of the 
other adult females in the group seemed to be about equal. 
Allogrooming was usually accomplished without vocaliza­
tions. However, one female that had just given birth, emit­
ted gutteral chatters and trills when approaching, following 
and grooming the old male of the group. After 2 or 3 weeks 
she stopped giving these calls. 
Old males did not necessarily receive grooming from 
adult females. Old males that joined a group might not be 
groomed at all. One adult male, that joined group A in 
March 1967, was groomed 2 months later by a juvenile female. 
Juvenile and adult females are attracted to infants. 
The mothers tried to avoid these contacts between other 

PDF PAGE 128
Figure 22. Juvenile, left, being groomed by Ocean, center, and Ocean being 
groomed by 3 Fingers. Both adult females have infants on their 
backs: Jacob, center, 3 weeks old, and rtatasha, right, almost 
3 months old. 
(-• 
CO 

PDF PAGE 129
119 
individuals and their infants by turning around, or by leaving. 
The females wanting to inspect or groom the infant countered 
this tendancy by grooming the mother first or intermittently. 
This has been called appeasement grooming and it has been 
observed in two species of Macaca (Sparks, 1967). After the 
infants had reached 3 months of age, mothers allowed other 
individuals to contact them. 
It has been proposed that within a group the most dominant 
individuals, such as the dominant males, do little or no 
grooming. These individuals receive most of the grooming, 
whereas subordinate individuals, such as adult females, do 
most grooming. In addition to dominance, the age and sex of 
an individual determines whom it will groom, and who will 
groom it (Sparks, 1967). This system seems to explain the 
grooming relationships in groups of Cebus. 
Intragroup Agonistic Behavior 
Agonistic interactions within Cebus groups are usually 
mild, even though physical contacts may occur. The old 
male or males of the group usually did not interfere with 
agonistic interactions of other members of the group, unless 
they were in some way directly involved. The adult male 
might hit an animal that is disturbing him, without even 
looking at the animal, or might give a quick warning bite. 
Infants might not take heed and were unpunished, but adults 
responded immediately to being hit or warned by the old 
males. The old males did not make open-mouth threats to 

PDF PAGE 130
120 
the other members of the group, and rarely made agonistic 
vocalizations within the group. 
Juvenile and adult females were responsible for most of 
the disputes. Usually the disputes arose when an adult had 
something, such as food or an infant, or could provide some­
thing, such as grooming, that was attractive to the juvenile 
or other adult. Some disputes simply involved one or both 
animals making open-mouth threats in the threat position, 
bouncing, or branch-shaking at the other. The animal to which 
these displays was directed then left. Another adult female 
might assume the assistance posture with either the adult 
female or a juvenile. In some cases the juvenile might per­
sist and tagging developed. During tagging an adult might 
grab an extremity of a juvenile giving a warning bite, or 
it might push the juvenile away, but this might only bring 
about temporary withdrawal. The juvenile only ceased when 
it was apparently convinced that it could not get what it 
wanted. Screams, whistles, and trills usually accompanied 
such interactions. Tail-rump waggles and trills were sometimes 
displayed by the animal that was forced to leave. 
Grins were used occasionally by young animals to appease 
adults, and head shakes with gutteral chatter were produced 
at times by all individuals when they were with the adult 
male(s). Chases usually were short and chased animals 
escaped. On one occasion a young Cebus chased another on 
the ground, possibly as a result of too much roughness 
during play. The rest of the group immediately focused their 

PDF PAGE 131
121 
attention on the disappearing pair, but none interposed. 
Chases might be so short that they were simply a lunge at 
the other animal, particularly if the animal had some food. 
Wrestling and mouthing occurred but biting was never observed. 
Agonistic behavior was not observed being directed 
towards single non-group males, as had been reported for Cebus 
(see Enders, 1935) and the howler monkey (Carpenter, 1965). 
When such a male joined group A, he was ignored and was able 
to move gradually from the periphery into the center of the 
group over a period of a couple of months. After having been 
with the group for almost 2 months this male was observed, 
at the end of a rest period, to shake vigorously a tree in 
which an adult female and infant were sleeping. It may have 
been in response to some coatimundis in a nearby tree that 
were starting to run away, but it was the first time that 
this male was observed to act aggressively while within the 
group. Two weeks later a juvenile female was observed grooming 
this male; a week later a juvenile was observed jumping out 
of his way as he walked along a branch. Four months after 
first being seen with the group, this male was able to sit 
next to the group's old male with his right arm across the 
male's back. He also began to accompany the old male during 
intergroup contacts. 
In general it might be said that capuchins are peaceful 
animals. The individuals know each other well, and the little 
agonistic behavior that occurs consists of displays and 
warnings. Capuchins lack a rigid dominance structuring in 

PDF PAGE 132
122 
their groups and thus overt fighting is rare, as compared to 
baboons (Hall and DeVore, 1965). Bernstein's (1965) observa­
tions of a captive group of Cebus albifrons seem to concur 
with those I have made in the wild. 
Territorial Behavior 
In the field, I was not always aware that another group 
was near, but from the general disturbance in an observed 
group it was apparent that something was "wrong." The general 
disturbance usually consisted of trills, chatter-screams, 
whistles, and sometimes branch breaking. Some of the individ­
uals might orient themselves in a particular direction and 
might even move off in that direction. This general disturb­
ance might be followed immediately, or a few minutes later, 
by more obvious activity. On the other hand, there were 
occasions when the group I was with was caught totally un­
aware by the sudden charge of the old male(s) from another 
group. 
When actual contact was made at a territory border, it 
was usually only between the old males of the two different 
groups. The remaining members of both groups remained out 
of sight of each other. They might scream or chatter-scream, 
and might also do some branch breaking. The sound of snapping 
branches might often be the first indication of contact. 
If the old male had the chance, he ran toward the on coming 
male of the other group, chortling. The remaining members 
of the two groups quickly became quiet and moved away from 

PDF PAGE 133
123 
the border area. The old males, meanwhile, engaged in a 
rapid chase up and down trees and across the ground. Physical 
contact was usually not made, but there was always the chance 
that a male would lose his footing and fall during this 
frenzied chase. At some point the chase, which probably 
lasted less than a minute, comes to an end, possibly because 
one of the males has succeeded in losing the other in the 
trees. On one occasion I was standing below the males of 
groups A and B, who stood facing each other about 20 feet 
apart, grinding their teeth. The males then disappeared and 
returned to their groups. 
If the old male of one group did not have time -to -charge, 
he turned and ran, being followed quickly by the challenging 
male of the second group. Other members of the first, group 
screamed, broke branches and moved around in the area in 
apparent confusion. Eventually, the challenging male returns, 
moving through the first group on the way to his own group. 
At times old males might be accompanied by another ,' 
member of the group, at least up to the edge of the group 
they are challenging. Spot of group A was sometimes followed 
by the adult male Ateles that frequently spent the day with 
the group. Group B had 2 old males, Pug and Flame, but Flame 
was not observed to accompany Pug. This was also true for 
group C, which had 2 old males. Only one of them would come 
forth to challenge. In the few observations made of charging 
males, the mouth was opened wide and the teeth were bared 
in an open-mouth threat. 

PDF PAGE 134
124 
When contact occurred within a group's territory, the 
resident old male was accompanied by most of the adult females 
in the group, at least those without young. I was never able 
to keep up with this "defense team" and thus do not know 
what these adults did, if anything, when they contacted the 
intruding group. 
On several occasions, before group A2 contained an adult 
male (see Table 6), it had mild encounters with group A-,. The 
adult females of group A2, particularly Fuzzy-Black-Spots-on-
Forehead (2FA), moved quickly through the trees towards A, 
making chatter-screams and trills. A, responded with similar 
vocalizations and there was some minor mixing of the groups, 
after which A, departed. After Surplus (23MA), an adult male, 
joined A2, territorial encounters started to include the 
charging of males. On the other hand, the mere presence of 
an adult male alone was not observed to stimulate attack by 
the old group males. In fact a lone adult male, Ward (17MA), 
joined group A which already had an active old male, Spot 
(IMA). 

PDF PAGE 135
125 
INTERSPECIFIC BEHAVIOR 
Interactions with Predators and Man 
During my stay on Barro Colorado Island an ocelot was 
sighted once near the clearing. Pumas and possibly other 
large cats have been on the island in the past, although they 
have not been seen in recent years. The only large ground 
animal to which I observed Cebus reacting was myself, and I 
will assume that initial reactions to me are somewhat similar 
to their reactions to a large ground predator. 
The first response to the sighting of a human was usually 
a series of gyrrahs, or alarm barks by several individuals. 
If the human did not move, the capuchins might quiet down 
and some might approach for a better look. The old male 
might lie down to watch, and he might shift his position 
several times if he is being watched in return. 
More frequently, hqwever, the capuchins were greatly 
disturbed at the sudden appearance of a human, and they 
t 
reacted by emitting gyrrahs. One or more of the animals 
might break branches within a 50-foot radius of the source 
of disturbance. Some assumed the threat posture and bounced, 
or shook branches. The male might come to the assistance 
of one of these animals, particularly if the rest of the 
group had left, and both might bounce together and make open-
mouth threats (Figs. 13, 15 and 16). After this initial 
response, four different types of escape procedures may be 
used. 

PDF PAGE 136
126 
(1) The monkeys became quiet and gradually moved away in 
several directions, after which they regrouped some 
distance away. 
(2) Most of the group dispersed quietly, but one or two in­
dividuals remained behind making gyrrahs and possibly 
continued breaking off branches. After 15 to 20 minutes 
these animals became quiet and disappeared. The animals 
staying behind might be adult females or juveniles. 
Occasionally, the old male, either with others or by 
himself might stay behind for short periods. If the 
old male was present, tooth grinding might be heard. 
(3) While most of the group remained quiet and inconspicuous, 
one, two or three individuals started to move away emitting 
gyrrahs and breaking branches. If the "predator" followed, 
the monkeys continued to move away, and if they could 
not lose him, they eventually started to circle back. 
This might persist until the "predator" tired or the 
monkeys gave up and tried something else. 
(4) While the main part of the group moved quietly off in 
one direction, 1 or 2 monkeys made gyrrahs, and moved 
off in the opposite direction. At some point these 
animals became quiet and doubled back to join the group. 
After repeated peaceful contacts have been made with a 
group by an observer, evasion tactics are gradually, but 
not completely, dropped. The monkeys tended to come closer 
and more time was spent breaking and dropping sticks. After 
a few months, however, stick breaking as a group activity no 

PDF PAGE 137
i 
t 
127 
longer existed. It seems very likely that stick breaking, 
when used against a ground predator, is mainly an activity 
to draw attention of a predator to a few animals so that the 
rest of the group can escape. Some of the branches were 
large and could do damage. White-faced monkeys do not throw 
or direct the fall of the branches or wood fragments that 
break or are broken off. 
Relations with Ateles 
Cebus and Ateles have often been reported to live in 
mixed groups (Bernstein, 1964b). In the past several years 
Ateles have been purchased in the markets and released on 
the island. This has been done because the red spider monkey 
is threatened with extinction throughout most of its range. 
A group of five females and young, and one adult male had 
established itself around the clearing, and within the ter­
ritory of Cebus group A. The adult male spent much of each 
day traveling with group A, while the females and young moved 
about on their own. While with the Cebus group, the male 
Ateles followed their activity pattern for the day. He usually 
did not interact with any of the capuchins, and remained 
somewhat on the periphery of the group. If the group rested, 
he rested but by himself. When contacts were made with 
other groups, the male Ateles frequently accompanied Spot, 
the old male of group A, when Spot charged or when he turned 
and fled. The male Ateles, however, followed at a slow rate, 
and probably did not take part in the actual conflict. 

PDF PAGE 138
128 
When female spider monkeys are with the group, inter­
actions do occur. Sometimes the females chased or were chased 
by Cebus juveniles over short distances, apparently in play. 
One of the adult Ateles females sometimes approached and 
layed down with Spot, the old male of group A, during rest 
periods. If an adult female Cebus was with Spot, it either 
remained or left. The Ateles female always initially sat in 
front of Spot and solicited grooming, and Spot did sometimes 
make prefunctory allogrooming movements rarely lasting more 
than a few seconds. After this the Ateles female usually 
layed down in contact with Spot and slept. Ateles females did 
not groom Spot, but once a female did touch Spot's head with 
her hand. Several times Spot was observed to deliver a warning 
bite to the Ateles female. The reasons for the warning bites 
were not obvious, but they seemed to be elicited by general 
irritation at the closeness of the female. Females did not 
react at all to Spot's warning bites. On one occasion an 
adult female Cebus with Spot made chatter-screams at the 
Ateles. Spot pushed the Ateles female away and although the 
Cebus female tagged her, the Ateles stayed. 
Young capuchins on Barro Colorado Island have been ob­
served at least once to groom an Ateles female and at the 
other extreme, some agonistic conflicts between these animals 
have also been observed (Eisenberg and Kuehn, 1966). 
One incident of actual fighting was observed between 
the Ateles and Cebus late one afternoon, when the animals 
were feeding. Spot and one of the subadult Cebus males were 

PDF PAGE 139
129 
seen following, or chasing 2 Ateles females. About 2 minutes 
later, screams broke out from both species, and all individuals 
started to converge towards the Ateles male. The male had 
caught and-was grappling with a juvenile Cebus while he hung 
by his tail. The Ateles male was trying to close his mouth 
on the Cebus, but it was moving too much and it finally escaped. 
This Ateles male only had one lower canine tooth, and this 
may be why the Cebus was not wounded. Within 15 minutes or 
so after the fight, the 2 species were eating peacefully 
together. 
Relations with Alouatta 
Carpenter (1934) reported that Cebus did not interact 
with howler monkeys, and frequently this was the case during 
my period of observation. Altmann (1959), however, does 
record a very mild interaction between a Cebus and a howler 
female with an infant. Collias and Southwick (1952) have 
also observed mild agonistic encounters between these two 
species. Capuchins and howlers have been observed moving 
together in mixed groups (Altmann, 1959), although neither 
Bernstein (1964b) nor I have observed this. 
Capuchins did pass through trees occupied by howlers 
without any interaction, but sometimes there were disturbances. 
These disturbances usually took place in large food trees, 
such as Ficus, which had a canopy spread of about 100 feet. 
Frequently the interaction consisted of a howler male slowly 
approaching one or two Cebus individuals on a branch near 

PDF PAGE 140
130 
him (or near a howler female). The Cebus turned to the howler 
and made open-mouth threats, shook the branch, and emitted 
trills and screams. The howler male then turned back starting 
to make low barks. A young Cebus might follow the retreating 
howler male, breaking off branches and shaking limbs. 
Female howlers usually retreated when a Cebus approached, 
although some held their position as a Cebus jumped past or 
over them. 
Once four juvenile white-faced monkeys slowly chased 
an infant howler monkey across, up, and down vines. They 
never made physical contact, and the infant returned to its 
mother. 
Relations with Nasua 
Coatimundis usually were ignored by the Cebus, even when 
the two species fed in the same trees, or near each other on 
the ground. A subadult male Cebus once broke off some 
branches and bounced up and down several times when a young 
pet coati climbed up the tree he was in. The Cebus also 
ground his teeth. On a couple of occasions, Cebus actually 
chased coatis out of trees or across the ground. If young 
coatis were in danger, the adults returned and held their 
ground, while snarling at the Cebus. Usually these encounters 
involved young Cebus individuals, who appeared to be curious 
or interested in play. 
Solitary male coatis were usually avoided by all members 
of a Cebus group, except possibly the old males of the group. 

PDF PAGE 141
131 
Relations with Other Mammals 
The collared peccary, Tayassu tajacu, and the agouti, 
Dasyprocta punctata, were frequently attracted to the sounds 
of Cebus feeding, and would eat or carry away fruit that a 
Cebus had dropped. Cebus might move on the ground among a 
band of peccary. Cebus usually responded to the alarm calls 
of these two species by a dashing up, or moving higher in the 
trees. 
Cebus seem to ignore the presence of sloths, but once 
a 3-toe sloth, Bradypus, drew its right arm back to strike, 
as a Cebus stood near it. 
Relations with Other Animals 
Once the members of group A discovered a boa constrictor, 
about 10 feet in length, sleeping on the ground. The reaction 
to the snake lasted more than 30 minutes. Most of this time 
only two Cebus monkeys were involved, while the other members 
of the group rested nearby. The two individuals, possibly 
juveniles, jumped around in the branches 6 feet above the 
snake, making gyrrahs. Eventually the Cebus left the area. 
The snake did not move throughout the whole performance. 
Cebus monkeys did react with bird gyrrahs to vultures, 
hawks and some smaller species when they flew over head. 
Vultures that flew up from the ground, however, did not evoke 
alarm from the monkeys. (See section on bird gyrrah under 
vocalizations.) 

PDF PAGE 142
132 
As has been noticed by others, one or two double-toothed 
kites, Harpagus bidentatus, may follow a Cebus group for part 
or most of the day (Greenlaw, 1967). Although the individual 
birds may change, there was usually a kite with a group each 
day. Apparently movement of the monkeys through the trees 
disturbs insects and other small animals, which are preyed 
upon by the birds. A similar relationship occurs between 
army ants and ant-birds, where the birds feed on insects 
flushed by the ants. I spent very little time watching the 
kites, but did observe a cicada being eaten, and another time 
saw a kite capture and eat an arboreal lizard. Willis (in 
Greenlaw, 1967) has also seen the double-toothed kite follow­
ing groups of squirrel monkeys in South America. 
On two occasions I observed the white hawk, Leucopternis 
albicollis, sitting quietly in some trees near a group of 
white-faced monkeys. These hawks may have been waiting for 
small animals to be flushed by the monkeys. Stott and Selsor 
(1961) once observed four slaty-tailed trogons, Trogon massena, 
feeding on insects disturbed by Cebus on Barro Colorado Island. 
Other species of birds (drongos, hornbills, and fairy 
bluebirds) are known to follow groups of macaques and of 
Celebes apes (Stott, 1947). 

PDF PAGE 143
133 
DISCUSSION 
During my study the population appeared to be increasing. 
There were births, no deaths, and one group of 15 individuals 
split over a period of several months. This suggests that 
the optimum group size might be 15 or lower. But previous 
informal censuses of Cebus on Barro Colorado Island indicated 
groups as large as 30 (Chapman, 1938) to 60 (C.R. Carpenter, 
pers. com.) in the 1930's, and between 40 and 50 in 1951 and 
1959 (C. H. Southwick, pers. com.). 
This may be accounted for in the following way. As the 
population increases, groups divide and split up their ter­
ritories into smaller units. At some point the minimum ter­
ritory size is reactied and group division, accompanied by 
further splitting of the territory, needs to be avoided. 
Two things may now occur. All members are retained within 
the group, and group size thus increases. Or territoriality 
itself may break down, and neighboring groups which are 
meeting almost daily may merge and thus take advantage of 
a larger territory size. At some later time disease, lowered 
birth rates, increased infant mortality, increased fighting, 
or other factors may cause a drop in the over-all population. 
Disease has been suggested as the factor that caused a drop 
in the howler monkey population on Barro Colorado Island 
(Collias and Southwick, 1952). Fighting has been suggested 
to occur during contacts between langur groups at times of 

PDF PAGE 144
134 
high population densities, when the range size was reduced 
for the group (Ripley, 1967). 
The functions of territories and territorial behavior 
in primates have been discussed in detail by others 
(Carpenter, 1958; Hediger, 1961). In Cebus monkeys on Barro 
Colorado Island, territorial behavior seems to be important 
in maintaining the size of the territory ensuring that the 
group will have food throughout the year, and from one year 
to the next. 
Some of the Old World monkeys and apes (rhesus, chim­
panzee, and gorilla) have graded series of vocalization, while 
the prosimians studied so far seem to have discrete systems 
(Marler, 1965). If the vocalizations of Cebus monkeys can 
be considered as representative of New World monkeys, it is 
possible that the vocal systems of the platyrrhines and 
catarrhines have undergone parallel evolution, as have some 
other aspects of their behavior and morphology. However, 
other factors, such as the size of the animal and social 
structure may also be involved. Moynihan (1967) suggested 
that graded vocal systems will only be found in those species 
which can eliminate ambiguity by the use of other means of 
communication, such as facial expressions and body gestures. 
The vocalizations of Cebus monkeys parallel in other 
ways with those of Old World monkeys, as generalized by 
Marler (1965). Capuchins have basically 10 vocalizations 
as compared to 10 to 15 for other primates. Most of the 
vocalizations have their major energy below 5 KHz, and some 

PDF PAGE 145
135 
of these have wide frequency bands, i.e., they are not pure 
tones. The vocalization used for long distance communication, 
the arrawh, tends toward being a pure tone in the lower 
frequencies, which makes it more efficient for such com­
munication, i.e., the lower frequencies travel greater 
distances. 
Some structuring of vocalizations is needed for species 
recognition, particularly in relation to the long distance 
vocalizations (Marler, 1965). Fig. 23 shows the contact or 
group spacing calls of five species belonging to four dif­
ferent genera. The top row shows an arrawh triplet for Cebus 
capucinus. This call as stated above, is used when an in­
dividual becomes separated from the rest of its group and 
tries to reestablish contact. The first sonagram in the 
top row was included for comparison with the Ateles call 
below. The Ateles call is frequently given in triplets (only 
the second unit of a triplet is shown in Fig. 23) and is 
given by the male during the day or at night, to call females 
or other group members together. (This may be the Ateles 
"caw" call of Eisenberg and Kuehn, 1966.) The call is almost 
twice as long as the Cebus capucinus call, and it has two 
narrow frequency bands instead of the one of Cebus capucinus. 
However, the call sounds similar to the arrawh to the human 
ear. The call of Alouatta is usually given as a triplet, 
but this is difficult to distinguish as usually several males 
overlap in their howls. These howls are given at dawn, and 
are thought to space out groups because the groups call back 

PDF PAGE 146
w.P" 'ey m1 
CHIRP YIP HUH ARRAWH 
PURR TRILL WHISTLE 
, 10 
TRILL GUT CHAT SCREAM GYRRAH 
TIME IN SECONDS 
Figure 23. Contact and group spacing calls of different>species, 

PDF PAGE 147
137 
and forth. Most of the first, all of the second, and most 
of the third unit of the triplet can be seen in the sonagram. 
The two frequency bands somewhat resemble that of Ateles, 
but they are lower. The length of the units is close to those 
of the arrawh of Cebus capucinus, although again the howler 
frequencies are lower. The Saguinus contact call (recorded 
from caged animals) spreads the energy into five frequency 
bands (lower right), and the pitch is higher than for the 
other species. The higher pitch correlates with the smaller 
body size of the species (Tembrock, 1963). The call again 
is usually a triplet with the duration of one unit similar 
to that for Cebus capucinus. The contact call for Cebus 
apella (upper right) was recorded from a caged male. The 
male gave this call in response to the _C. capucinus arrawh. 
It is shorter than the arrawh and shows more frequency modu­
lation than the Saguinus contact call. It is most similar 
to the huh call of_C. capucinus (Fig. 21). In general, there 
seems to be more difference between the _C. capucinus and 
_C. apella calls than there is between calls of _C. capucinus 
and the other genera. Structurally all these calls are 
similar to the long distance contact call of the timber wolf, 
Canis lupus (Theberge and Falls, 1967). This suggests that 
the similarity of function of the calls (to communicate over 
long distances) is responsible for the similarity in physical 
structure. 
The alarm call, or gyrrah, of Cebus agrees in detail 
with the generalized alarm bark that Marler (1965) has 

PDF PAGE 148
138 
proposed. "The alarm bark is a loud sound with a relatively 
wide frequency spectrum and with a sharp beginning and end, 
all aiding its locatability. It is probably as brief as it 
can be without a loss of energy and conveys its message as 
rapidly and as far as possible" (Marler, 1965). 
In addition to vocalizations, Cebus cough and sneeze. 
These appear to be comfort movements, i.e., used to clear 
nasal passages. Sneezing in Callicebus is alleged to have 
some alarm and threat components, and Moynihan (1966) has 
suggested that the warning display of other cebids, such as 
Cebus and Ateles have components which have been derived from 
sneezing. I have no information on this. 
It seems that many of the vocalizations, facial expres­
sions, and body gestures of Cebus capucinus are similar to 
those of other New and Old World monkeys. Much more work is 
needed before the importance of some of the variations 
between species can be understood. 
Three or 4-year-old Cebus males were observed to 
copulate with adult females, but there is at present no 
evidence that these copulations led to pregnancy. Adult 
males were not observed to copulate in the wild (only two 
copulations were observed), but they did copulate with females 
in captivity and pregnancy followed. Males and females 
probably are sexually mature at 4 years of age, but full 
physical maturity is reached in males only after 7 or 8 years. 
A similar delay in physical development is found in male 
baboons. Sexual maturity is reached in both sexes at 5 years 

PDF PAGE 149
139 
of age, but the males take "seven to ten years to attain full 
physical growth. . . " (DeVore and Hall, 1965). Although 
all baboon males that have attained sexual maturity copulate 
with adult females, usually only the matings of dominant 
adult males with females led to pregnancy. Young or less 
dominant males copulated with the females, usually during the 
first 10 days of the 35 day estrus cycle. Dominant males 
copulated with females between the 9th and 19th days when the 
females exhibited maximal swelling of the sexual skin and 
were at their peak of estrus. Ovulation occurs on the 19th 
day (DeVore, I965). 
It is possible as was suggested by Hamlett (1939), that 
Cebus monkeys are seasonal or have peaks in births at par­
ticular times of the year. Three of the five adult females 
that were observed closely during the 18 months of the 
study had infants between January 1 and April 6, 1967. This 
coincides with the dry season. Although the data are scanty, 
they do suggest that there could be a peak in births during 
the dry season. Lancaster and Lee (1965) have reviewed the 
data on 11 species of Old World monkeys and apes, and have 
found that nine of them have "a birth season or a birth peak" 
at some time during the year. Those species living in areas 
where the seasons differ greatly tend to have more births 
or all births at one time of the year. Those animals living 
in areas where seasonal differences are small, have essenti­
ally equivalent birth rates throughout the year (Lancaster 
and Lee, 1965). 

PDF PAGE 150
i4o 
As mentioned above, play in Cebus is functionally im­
portant in establishing relationships between individuals 
while they are young. This is particularly important for 
subadult males, who as adults might be subject to fatal or 
crippling injuries, when interacting with other adult males. 
Play is one of the most prominent activities between juvenile 
males in a group. Also when an adult male joined group A, 
he participated in play with the juvenile males of the group. 
The established adult males of groups did not engage in play. 
Play behavior in other species of monkeys may function simi­
larly within groups. Members of groups are rarely wounded 
by other group members, although one female baboon was observed 
being badly mauled by two other females (Hall and DeVore, 
1965). Dominance orders appear to be established within 
groups by play and are usually maintained between adults 
by threats, displays, or much more subtle methods, rather 
than by overt fighting. 
Cebus is reported to allogroom less frequently than 
Callicebus, Pithecia (Moynihan, 1967), and the rhesus monkey, but 
capuchins do allogroom as much or more than does the gibbon 
(Bernstein, 1965). Marler (1965) has suggested that allo­
grooming is more prominent in those species where dominance 
is well developed, such as rhesus and baboons, and less 
prominent in species where relationships are more "peaceful," 
such as the gorilla. Agonistic activities and allogrooming 
in Cebus occur less frequently than in rhesus (Bernstein, 
1965), which agrees with Marler's hypothesis. 

PDF PAGE 151
l4i 
The adult Cebus capucinus females seem to be the most 
important individuals in the group. They do most of the allo­
grooming, and because of this they are the ones that maintain 
social interrelationships. In daily progression, adult 
females may lead off, or at least they will be near the 
younger animals that do. The females aid other individuals 
during agonistic encounters, actively protect the group from 
predators, decoy predators, and will even protect the group's 
territory from other Cebus groups. When the females of group 
Ap protected their territory, the old male of group A did 
not charge, nor did he in any other way interact with them. 
Adult females may split away from a group which has an old 
male, to form or join a group without one. 
The. adult females do not groom adult males that have 
just joined their group, or that have been with the group 
for several months, even though the males may defend the 
group against predators or other Cebus groups. In addition, 
adult females are at least as active as mature males, or 
more so, in initiating sexual contacts. Female precopulatory 
behavior mimics that of male mounting and thrusting, and 
their external genitalia are very much like the pendulous 
penis of the male. 
This leads one to ask what the position of an old adult 
male is in a Cebus group. Bernstein (1966) has shown that 
although a group of Cebus albifrons lacked a rigid dominance 
system such as is found in rhesus, the large adult males 
do perform the roles frequently attributed to so-called 

PDF PAGE 152
142 
"dominant" males. Bernstein has suggested the term "control 
animal" be substituted for "dominant male." The "control 
animal" inhibits intragroup agonistic behavior, assists those 
seeking his aid, and protects the group from outside dis­
turbances. To some extent this better describes the role 
of the adult female, than the adult male, who is rarely in­
volved in intragroup agonistic behavior, in contrast to what 
has been observed in captive groups (Bernstein, 1965, 1966). 
However, there is no doubt that an established adult male 
ranks high in the group. He receives allogrooming from almost 
every member of the group, and does not reciprocate. Young 
members of the group may sometimes move out of his way, and 
adults and young may act submissively in his presence by 
emitting gutteral chatter, and making head shakes. Sometimes 
a few members of the group will even follow the old male for 
short distances. Adult males are larger than adult females, 
and their canine teeth are better developed. Most seem to 
have specific forehead patterns, and their behavior is some­
what specialized. Solitary males may interact agonistically 
with other non-group males. And old group males interact 
with old males of other groups, but interactions between 
group males and solitary males were not observed. There is 
an indication that acceptance or rejection of solitary males 
by a group is dependent on the reaction of the adult females 
(see Enders, 1935). 

PDF PAGE 153
143 
Interactions among solitary males may eventually 
determine which of them will rejoin groups and contribute 
to the gene pool of the species as old group males. I would 
like to suggest.-that the main role of a Cebus group's old 
male(s) is that of reproduction, and that his roles as protector 
of individuals or territory are nonessential, at least under 
low population conditions. 
Dominance orders may exist between groups. In spite of 
all the activity during territorial encounters, particularly 
between the old Cebus males, confrontations mainly consist 
of chasing and displays, and wounds rarely result. One adult 
Cebus male was observed with a wound while he was in the 
process of joining group A2. A younger male was seen with 
the group the previous day and was not seen again. It is 
possible that these two males had had little or no contact 
before encounter. Wounds also rarely occur in other primate 
species. On Cayo Santiago, the larger group of rhesus usually 
displaced the smaller group quietly, but in a few cases 
physical contact did occur and wounds resulted (Altmann, 1962). 
Baboon groups usually meet quietly, and one group may move 
slowly away. Less frequently, the males of two groups may 
approach each other and make gestures and vocalizations. 
Fighting was observed once (DeVore and Hall, 1965). Howler 
groups usually avoid contact completely because of their 
dawn calls, but when they do come in contact, they sit and 
roar for as long as several hours (Carpenter, 1965), Ter­
ritorial behavior in the langurs, Presbytia cristatus 

PDF PAGE 154
144 
(Bernstein, 1967) and P. entellus (Sugiyama, 1967) is very 
similar to that of Cebus. The leader males charge towards 
each other, chase, display, and vocalize. In a very few 
cases physical contact occurs and the males may grapple and 
bite. However, most of the observed injuries were the result 
of falls (Bernstein, 1967). Ripley's (1967) descriptions of 
group contacts in P. entellus are more complicated, possibly 
because she observed the monkeys under high population condi­
tions. These groups do engage in aggressive encounters, even 
though they give spacing calls at dawn, as do howler monkeys. 
At the start of encounters the group males make long jumps 
from branch to branch, with some of the branches breaking 
under the weight of the monkeys. Actual contacts ". . .in­
volved chases, displacements, threats, mild wrestling, 
grabbing, and at times true fighting (including biting)." 
The dominant male in Presbytis entellus groups usually led 
the chases, but actual fighting was done by low-ranking males. 
Sometimes females without young, and subadult females, also 
took part in the fighting. At other times all members of 
each group took part in the displays and physical contacts. 
Injuries that resulted, however, were not serious. 
' At the present time there are few data to show how 
inter-group dominance might be established. Possibly when 
males switch groups, they may retain their position in the 
old dominance structure when they interact with the males 
of their old group. In species in which young males live 
separately from their groups, they may form relationships 

PDF PAGE 155
145 
with each other which will be important later when the males 
rejoin their original or new groups. It is also possible that 
because of their experiences as young animals during play, 
they learn certain "cues" which will aid them to determine 
their level of dominance with a new male, without actually 
engaging in physical contact. 
There is some indication that there may be a "dominance" 
hierarchy between species. Old males of Cebus groups are 
allogroomed by most of the individuals in their group, and 
particularly by adult females. On the other hand, these 
i 
males were only observed to autogroom, and not to groom other 
members of the group. It is generally believed that this 
relationship is explained by the fact that the most dominant 
animal grooms others very little, whereas subdominant animals 
do most of the grooming (Sparks, 1967). Possibly this same 
framework can be shifted to apply to species, as well as to 
members of a species. Female Ateles solicited grooming from 
the adult male Cebus of group A, and did receive at least a 
token amount of grooming from him. Ateles are larger monkeys 
than Cebus so that size may be an important factor here. 
The Cebus male did understand the grooming solicitation of 
the female Ateles, as evidenced by his behavior, but this 
is not surprising as such behavior is similar in most monkeys, 
New and Old World. It is not immediately apparent why the 
Ateles females only solicited grooming from the old Cebus 
male. 

PDF PAGE 156
146 
The social structure and behavior of Cebus capucinus 
groups is similar to that of some of the terrestrial or semi-
terrestrial species of the Old World. In general Cebus monkeys 
seem most similar to Erythrocebus (Hall, 1967; Hall, Boelkins, 
and Goswell, 1965), Presbytis entellus (Jay, 1965; Ripley, 
1967; Sugiyama, 1967), and to a lesser extent to the single 
male groups of Papio hamadryas (Kummer and Kurt, 1963). The 
slight development of dominance (Bernstein, 1966), and the 
graded vocal system of capuchins are similar to that seen in 
the apes, gorilla, chimpanzee, and gibbon (Bernstein, 1965; 
Marler, I965). 
Cebus, at least in captivity, is known to be very intel­
ligent, a good manipulator (Hill, i960), and capable of using 
tools (Vevers and Weiner, 1963; KlUver, 1933, 1937). In the 
wild they are able to walk bipedally and to carry objects. 
It is tempting to suggest, from the abilities displayed by 
this arboreal primate, both in the wild and in captivity, 
that man's bipedal ancestors may have arisen in the forest, 
rather than in the open savannas as has been proposed by 
*Kortlandt and Kooij (I963). 

PDF PAGE 157
147 
SUMMARY 
The white-faced monkey, Cebus capucinus, was observed 
for 18 months on Barro Colorado Island in the Canal Zone. 
During this period, plants belonging to 35 families and 72 
species were eaten. Many insects were also eaten, including 
Orthoptera, Phasmatodea, Homoptera, Coleoptera, Lepidoptera, 
and Hymenoptera. Only once were vertebrates observed being 
eaten--2 infant squirrels. The content of the diet changed 
gradually as the year progressed, and was somewhat different 
from one year to the next. Individual trees of one species 
produced fruit only every other year within the territory 
of one Cebus group. Cebus was important in dispersing seeds, • 
and in some cases, in pollinating flowers. The morphology 
of certain species of plants might be changed by certain 
activities of the white-faced monkey. 
The territories of several groups were determined. One 
group of 15 individuals, which was about maximum size, had 
a territory of 1/3 of a square mile. Such a group contained 
one or two old males, three to five adult females, two 
juvenile females, two juvenile males, and two to four infants. 
Although this was not observed during the study, there is 
a possibility that young males leave the group for several 
years, and then rejoin their old group or a new one. During 
the study period, a new group was started by two adult 
females and their young. An adult female and a juvenile 

PDF PAGE 158
148 
from a different group joined the initial females and young, 
and at least four different males of unknown background spent 
time with this new group. Eventually one of these males 
became attached to this group of females and young. Terri­
torial behavior then ensued. 
Males over 8 years of age, protected the group from 
danger, such as the old males of other groups or predators. 
Their role in reproduction, however, is probably most important. 
Young males between 3 and 4 years of age were smaller in build 
than old males. Females appear to be sexually mature at 
che end of the 3rd year, and the external morphology of the 
pendulous clitoris changes greatly at this time. Certain 
forehead markings were characteristics of newborn infants, 
juveniles, adult females, and old males. 
Cebus monkeys have a graded series of vocalizations of 
approximately 10 basic calls. Facial expressions and body 
movements were used to convey information. Individual odor 
might also be of some importance in communication. Some 
odorous plants were rubbed into the fur, and adult males 
often rub urine onto their arms, feet and tails. 
* Infants are carried on the backs of their mothers for 
-the first several months. During rest periods young infants 
begin to explore the area around them and to leave their 
mothers for increasingly longer periods of time. They gradu­
ally stray further away. Eventually, infants move with 
the group on their own, but if they are unable to keep up 
their mothers assisted. Most females become pregnant every 

PDF PAGE 159
149 
2 or more years, but evidence is presented indicating that 
females do have infants in consecutive years. As infants 
become independent they engage in play with other infants 
and juveniles. Play, however, was most prominent in juveniles, 
and particularly between male juveniles. Dominance relation­
ships among animals of the same age appear to be established 
during play interactions. Play consists of chasing, pulling, 
wrestling, and mouthing. 
Several problems need to be investigated in more detail 
before this description of the behavior and ecology of Cebus 
capucinus can be considered complete, and this research will ; , 
be carried out in 1968-1969. Some of the problems can only 
be answered by studies extending over a long period of time 
on animals whose histories are partly or completely known. 
More data need to be obtained on the frequency and timing 
of births, on infant-mother relationships, and on sexual 
behavior. Several more infants need to be observed during 
their development, so that the changes observed in their 
behavior and in their relationships with other individuals 
can be added to the information presently available. 
Two young males approaching the subadult stage were 
observed during this study. These two individual should 
be leaving their group soon, or may have left their group 
already, as I have hypothesized. If these subadult males 
leave their groups it should then be possible to follow them 
during their solitary life as they are already adapted to 
the presence of a human observer. Very little data have 

PDF PAGE 160
150 
been obtained on solitary or extra-group males in species 
where they are known to occur. 
Group Ag should now be firmly established in its ter­
ritory and it may also have added new adult members. An 
attempt will be made to follow the increase in population 
size of this group and the effects of this increase on the 
group's territory. The effect of this group on surrounding 
groups will also be examined. Will there be more group con­
tacts, and more territorial fights, or will there be a change 
in intergroup relations, as the population size increases? 
The forehead patterns seem to change as individuals age. 
More data are needed on this phenomenon and on the possible 
function of these patterns in social behavior, beyond that 
of individual recognition. More data need to be obtained 
on the interactions between individuals of different ages 
and sexes within the group. 

PDF PAGE 161
151 
APPENDIX 
Plants 
The following list of plants includes all those species 
which Cebus included in their diet, as well as other species 
which Cebus used for other purposes. A question mark follow­
ing the scientific name indicates that the identification is 
temporary until further verification can be made. The species 
will be followed by the original field number, which repre­
sents the year, month, day, and time of day, respectively, 
when the first specimen was collected. Those specimens that 
still need identification will be listed by their field number 
only, with the expectation that identification will follow 
in the future. Some of the fruit and leaf specimens are now 
in the herbarium of the Missouri Botanical Gardens. A set 
of color slides of fruits is presently held by the author 
and eventually a set of these will be in the library on Barro 
Colorado Island. A plus (+) indicates that the species is 
an important or frequent food source. An asterisk (*) indi­
cates the plant is not eaten. 
Probably plant species in phyla other than the one 
listed below are eaten. For instance, some algae, as well 
as protozoans, are probably ingested when water is drunk 
from tree holes. 

PDF PAGE 162
152 
Phylum Tracheophyta: Vascular Plants 
Subphylum Pteropsida 
Class Gymnospermiae 
Gnetaceae 
Gnetum leyboldii Tul. (66-10-20-1025). Drupes of this 
species were found freshly eaten on the ground while Cebus 
were in the trees above. The flesh of the fruit was sticky 
and tasted slightly of turpentine. 
Class Angiospermiae 
Subclass Monocotyledons 
Palmaceae 
Astrocaryum standleyanum Bailey (67-3-1-1224). Although 
the fruits are as plentiful as those of Scheelea, they are 
only eaten occasionally. This may indicate that the flesh, 
which is the part eaten, is less palatable, or that they 
are more difficult to obtain because of the long spines on 
the trunk and fronds. Cebus, however, wilJ travel through 
these trees, walking on the fronds. 
Bactris balanoidea (Oerst.) Wendl. (,67-1-3-1020). The 
new shoots in the center of this ground palm are broken off 
and the fleshly xower ends are chewed. On several days in 
January of 1967 some individuals moved from one plant to 
another breaking off the new growth and chewing or pressing 
out the liquids. None of the plant material was swallowed. 
Desmoncus isthmius Bailey (66-10-19-1700). As in Bactris 
the new growth at the top of the vine is broken off and 
chewed. Liquid as well as some of the pith seem to be taken 

PDF PAGE 163
153 
in and digested. In May 1967 the pits from three fruits of 
this species were recovered from Cebus fecal material. This 
suggests that the flesh of the fruit is chewed off. 
Oenocarpus panamanus Bailey (66-6-19-1630). Nuts from 
this species were occasionally removed from the tree and 
chewed. The white fiberous material around the seed was 
eaten. 
+Scheelea zonensis Bailey (66-5-4-0822). The soft sticky 
yellow pulp around the pit is eaten. Some of the pulp remains 
on the pit after it is dropped, and thus serves as a food 
source for the ground animals. 
Araceae 
Anthurium (67-5-20-0858). Several times during the 
study the reproductive parts, spaths and spadixes, were 
broken off and in some cases ripped or chewed apart and then 
dropped. 
^Dieffenbachia oerstedii Schott (67-1-3-1244). On January 
3rd three Cebus, grouped together on the ground, rubbed leaf 
and stem parts of this species into their fur and went 
through vigorous self-grooming movements. This plant when 
freshly broken or cut gives off a strong mephitic odor and 
the sap is said to be strongly irritating to the skin; how­
ever, the sap had no effect on my skin. 
Bromeliaceae 
Tillandsia ? (67-5-20-0958). A young Cebus pulled 
flower apart after removing it from epiphyte. Some parts 
of the flower were placed in the mouth and then all of it 
was dropped. 

PDF PAGE 164
154 
Musaceae 
Musa sapientum L. (banana). This species does not occur 
naturally on the island. Cebus on the mainland, near Costa 
Rica, however, do eat bananas grown on plantations. 
Zlngiberaceae 
Costus spicatus (Jacq.) Swartz (66-10-5-1215). The repro­
ductive parts and some of the petals were eaten. 
Renealmia cernua (Swartz) Macbridge (66-8-29-1131). The 
individual flowers are pulled off the end of the stem, placed 
based first into the mouth, and pulled out between the teeth. 
This leaves the ovary and seeds in the mouth, and these parts 
of the flower are eaten. This species and Costus above are 
ground plants. 
Subclass Dicotyledons 
Lacistemaceae 
+Lacistema aggregattum (Berg) Rusby (67-5-16-1137). Some 
of the flower buds may be eaten, but definitely the white 
aril around the seed is eaten in the ripe fruit. The aril 
is juicy and slightly astringent. 
Moraceae 
+Cecropia longipes Pittier (66-7-20-1600). The fruit of 
species was eaten. The small hairs on the peduncle of the 
fruit did not appear to bother the Cebus, but were mildly 
painful to the skin on my hands. Ateles geoffroyi also eat 
this species. 

PDF PAGE 165
155 
+Cecropia spp. All the Cecropia trees are located around 
the margins of the laboratory clearing and the flowers and/or 
fruits of all species seemed to be eaten. 
+Flcus spp. (66-3-29-1520). Many species of figs were 
eaten, and possibly all species that occur on the island. 
Most of these fruits were green and ranged from under a half 
an inch to over an inch in diameter, depending on the species. 
One red epiphytic species was also eaten. The fruit is chewed 
and then is either spit out fairly intact, or is swallowed 
and defecated later. 
-HDlmedia aspera Ruiz & Pavon (66-8-5-1706). The orange 
globose fruits, the ripening ovaries, and possibly even the 
buds, are eaten. 
Polygonaceae 
Cocoloba leptostachya Benth (67-6-20-1106). Berries are 
eaten. The dark purple or ripe berries taste slightly 
astringent and sour. 
Nyctaginaceae 
Neea amplifolia Donn. Smith. (66-7-4-1145). Pulp around 
the seeds is eaten, and sometimes the seeds are swallowed 
also. The pulp first tastes slightly bitter. After this 
fades, it tastes like fresh green peas—uncooked. 
Menispermaceae 
Cissampelos tropaeolifolia D.C. (67-1-5-1018.2). Seeds 
from this species were recovered from Cebus fecal material 
along with seeds from other plant species. These seeds 
germinated, and the seedlings were identified. 

PDF PAGE 166
i 156 
Annonaceae 
+Annona ? (66-6-19-1720). The juicy yellowish pulp of 
this aggregate red fruit is eaten. 
*Annona hayesii Safford.(67-7-1-0930). One adult female 
Cebus was observed picking a fruit of this species, and then 
observed rubbing fragments of it into her fur. This was 
accompanied by vigorous scratching with hands and feet all 
over the body. Fruit, when first broken or cut, has a very 
strong pepper-like smell. This odor, however, quickly dis­
appears, and the final odor resembles that of a melon or 
cucumber. The sap from the fruit had no effect on my skin. 
+Annona purpurea ? (67-4-10-0925). The fruits are eaten 
on the tree and on the ground. Occasionally a Cebus climbed 
the tree and shook it, causing the fruits to fall to the 
ground where other members of the group were already picking 
up and eating fruits. The yellow pulp around the seeds is 
pulled out with the fingers or teeth and eaten. The soft 
thick shell exudes a sticky liquid. 
Annona spraguei Safford. (66-8-29-1440). The outer part 
of this fruit was chewed off on several occasions. 
+Desmopsis panamensis Safford.(66-11-2-1335). Fruits 
are eaten over a long period of time in both unripe and ripe 
condition. Seeds and shell are often spit out. 
(66-5-4-1150). Flower bud was broken open and reproduc­
tive parts (stamens) were eaten. 
Myristicaceae 
*+Virola guatamalensis (Hemsl.) Warb. (66-5-17-H40). The 
fruit of this species has a waxy red aril around the seed. 

PDF PAGE 167
157 
The dry aril is eaten and the seed is sometimes swallowed. 
Captive Cebus rubbed the aril and seed into the fur vigorously 
and then scratched themselves. Indians in Mexico use oil 
from this species as a hair conditioner, and also to apply 
it to their skin (Gilly, 1944). 
Rosaceae 
+Hirtella triandra Swartz. (67-6-26-1006). Fruit is tasteless 
but very juicy and is usually chewed with the head leaning 
backward to keep the juice from running out. Skin, pulp and 
seeds are then spit out. 
Connaraceae 
Connarus Turczinanowii Triana and Planch (66-6-14-1255). 
Some part of the fruit of this species may have been eaten 
once. 
Leguminosae 
Mimoseae 
+Inga spp. (66-4-3-1514). Many species of Inga are eaten 
and possibly all species on the Island are. In most cases 
the white pulp around the seed is eaten and the seeds are 
spit out. At other times the seeds are also swallowed intact 
and do germinate after passing through the gut. The white 
pulp has a very smooth sugary taste. Some of the species 
eaten are listed below. 
Inga edulis Mart, var. minututa Schery? (66-5-20-1655). 
Inga fagifolia (L.) Willd. (66-8-16-1328). 
Inga goldmanii Pittier (66-4-3-1642). 

PDF PAGE 168
158 
Inga laurina (Swartz) Willd. (66-8-29-1510). 
Inga pezizifera Benth. (66-8-29-1516). 
Inga sapindoides Willd. (67-4-12-1543). 
Papilionatae 
Clitoria arborescens Ait. (67-1-2-1308). The flowers of 
this vine are removed and crushed or punctured at the base 
with teeth to release nectar or other liquid. The complete 
flower is then dropped to the ground. Aldrich and Bole (1937, 
p. l49) mention that Cebus are "particularly fond of the 
blossoms of a liana with showy pink flowers that grew abun­
dantly on the ridges about Altos Cacao," on the Azuero 
Peninsula in Panama. 
+01eiocarpon panamense (Pitt.) Dwyer (66-3-29-0925). Formerly 
this species was called Dipteryx panamensis, or commonly as 
almendro. The drupe of this species has a thick layer of 
sweet sugary flesh surrounding the pit. This flesh is 
scraped off with the incisors and the amount removed depends 
on the stage of ripeness. The riper the fruit, the more flesh 
removed. Carpenter (1934) notes that the flesh of this fruit 
and the new buds are eaten by howler monkeys. 
Erythrina panamensis Standi. (67-1-17-1415). One Cebus 
chewed on the stem of a seedling in the forest. 
Rutaceae 
+Zanthoxylum setuiosum P. Wilson (66-8-16-1542). Bunches 
of these small berries are broken off and only the ripe 
berries are pulled off with the fingers or teeth and eaten. 
The flesh has a slight lemon flavor and after about 30 

PDF PAGE 169
159 
seconds a tingling sensation starts in the tongue and fades 
away. 
Simaroubiaceae 
Quassia amara L. (67-I-9-I316), Cebus, at least once, 
ate the red receptacle (M. Hladik, pers. com.). Standley 
(1933) reports that "All parts of the plant are as bitter 
as quinine. ..." 
Burseraceae 
+Protium panamense (Rose) I. M. Johnston (66-3-28-1358). 
The white flesh around the seed is eaten and possibly the 
seeds are swallowed. The flesh is very sweet. Individual 
trees of this species in the territory of group A did produce 
a large crop of fruit in 1966, but no flowers or fruits were 
produced in 1967. Outside of this area, trees did produce 
fruit in 1967. (66-8-11-1337). Fruits of these trees also 
were eaten, but formed a smaller part of the diet. I expect 
that there are actually two different species included here. 
Euphorbiaceae 
Croton tragiodes ? (66-5-8-1559). Flower buds of this 
species were eaten once. 
Hura crepitans L. (66-9-28-1112). This fruit was eaten 
while still green by one Cebus. The fleshy partitions 
separating the seeds were possibly the part chewed and 
swallowed. 
+Mabea occidentalis Benth. (67-1-2-1645). Fruit is broken 
open with teeth and the embryos are eaten. The embryo tastes 
nut-like and is crisp. The embryos are eaten before the 
fruit has ripened, and after. 

PDF PAGE 170
l6o 
tSapium sp. (66-8-16-1513). The red aril around seed is 
eaten. 
Anacardiaceae 
+Anacardium excelsum (Bert & Balb.) Skeels. (66-3-28-1430). 
Omily the fleshy receptacle which holds the fruit is eaten. 
When ripe, about the end of May, the receptacle tastes very 
sugary. 
+Mangifera indica L. (66-6-19-1044). A few mango trees 
remain in the forest from the farms, which originally dotted 
the northeastern side of the island. The fruits are eaten 
when present. 
+Spondias mombin L. (66-8-2-1626). The pulp of this yellow 
drupe is very juicy and good tasting, and is eaten by Cebus. 
A related species is cultivated in the Dutch East Indies and 
is eaten in various ways (Ochse, 1931). 
Sapindaceae 
+Allophylus psilospermus Radlk. (66-7-4-1420). Pulp 
around 'the seeds is eaten and tastes slightly sweet and powdery. 
Cupania fulvida Tr. and PI. (67-5-16-0950). Yellow pulp 
around seed appears to be eaten. 
+Cupania sylvatica Seem (66-5-20-1110). White aril around 
seed is eaten. It may taste slightly sour and is crisp. 
Paullinia turbacensis HBK (67-3-27-1250). White aril 
around seed is eaten. 
Talisia ? (66-10-20-1104). Either outer shell or flesh is 
eaten. Identification was tentatively made from seedling 
grown from seed by James A. Duke, 

PDF PAGE 171
161 
Tiliaceae 
*Apeiba membranacea Spruce ex Benth. (66-3-11-1645). The 
dry fruits are ripped open with the canine teeth and grubs 
of the mylabrid Amblycerus centralis are removed with the 
fingers from the seed dish, and are eaten. No part of the 
fruit itself is eaten. The grubs possibly are detectable by 
odor as uninfested fruits are often dropped unopen. Eventually 
most pods are striped from the trees. 
Apeiba tibourbou Aubl. (66-7-13-1112). Flowers of this 
species were picked by one Cebus and eaten. The fruits also 
were broken open several times, and grubs of the above species 
were removed. 
Bombacaceae 
(66-8-29-1300) Yellow fiberous pulp is eaten. Tentatively 
placed in this family. 
+Ochroma pyramidale (Cav. ex Lam.) Urban. (66-12-30-1443). 
For the first two months the flowers are out, they are visited 
almost daily by Cebus. The monkeys check each flower by 
sticking their heads into the blossoms; and after checking 
most or all of the blossoms on one tree, they jump to another 
tree and start the process again. It seems very likely that 
capuchins may serve as polinators by carrying pollen from 
one flower to another. The flower probably produces a nectar 
which collects in its base. Marmosets (Chapman, 1937), 
kinkajous, parrots and oropendulas also feed from these 
flowers. In late April 1967 two or three Cebus went through 

PDF PAGE 172
162 
the balsa trees east of the clearing and ripped open the seed 
pods. 
Sterculiaceae 
+Sterculia apetala (Jaqc.) Karst. (67-1-3-1630). Canine 
teeth are used to rip an opening in the hard pod. The large 
seeds are then pulled out with the forefinger and placed in 
the mouth. The inside of the pod and the seeds are covered 
with loose stiff bristles which stick into and irritate the 
skin. Capuchins, however, only seem to wipe their hands on 
a branch or tree while eating, and are not deterred by these 
bristles. The entire seed may be eaten, but at least in some 
cases only two thin outer layers around the seed are scraped 
off and the seed is spit out. Cebus in group A, were feeding 
on this fruit in January 1967 and by the end of the month 
the trees had been stripped or had dropped most of their pods. 
These trees were located on the north side of the island 
near the laboratory. Group B was discovered eating this 
fruit in April 1967 southwest of the tower, or the middle 
of the island. 
Dilleniaceae 
•fDoliocarpus major Gmel. (66-IO-5-O925). During early 
October 1966 this fruit made up a major portion of the diet 
of Cebus. The outer shell is removed and the seed still 
surrounded by its aril is swallowed complete. Within a few 
hours the seed, with its intact aril still around it, is 
defecated with a clear liquid. The seeds after this are 
viable, and they germinated after I had planted them. It 

PDF PAGE 173
163 
seems likely that some soluble substances are removed from 
the aril during passage through the digestive tract. If the 
aril is biten into a small amount of sugary fluid is released 
which proved to be slightly irritating to the tongue. This 
may explain why the aril and seed are not usually chewed up. 
Guffiferae 
+Rheedia edulis ? (Seem) Tr. & PI. (67-5-18-0952). The 
thin pliable shell of this fruit is broken open with the teeth 
and the seed with surrounding white juicy pulp is swallowed, 
or some seeds are spit out. The pulp tastes like a tart plum, 
but when at peak of ripeness it is very sweet and tastes like 
a cross between a lemon and a cantaloupe. 
+Rheedia madruno (HBK) (66-6-19-1537). Same as for above 
species. 
Violaceae 
+Hybanthus prunifolius (Schult.) Schultes (67-5-8-1120). 
This fruit was seen in May 1966, but capuchins were not ob­
served eating it until May 1967. While ripening, the 20 or 
more seeds grow in size and are hollow with a liquid inside. 
The liquid is sweet and has a fresh pea-like flavor. It is 
these seeds which are eaten and the shell is dropped. When 
the fruit is ripe the seeds change from white to black and 
become hard and dry. Once ripe the seeds are no longer 
eaten by Cebus. 
Rinorea squamata Blake (67-1-2-1140). Main root of a 
seedling was eaten by one Cebus. 

PDF PAGE 174
164 
Flacourtiaceae 
Casearia guianensis (Aubl.) Urban ? (67-5-20-0907). 
Complete fruit is swallowed. It is about 1 cm in diameter. 
Casearia nitida (L.) Jacq. ? (66-8-16-1131). Fruit is 
banged on limb uncil it splits open. Pinkish-yellow flesh 
and seeds may be eaten. 
Hasseltia floribunda HBK (66-6-19-1336). The red to black 
berries of this species are eaten. 
Lindackera laurina Presl. (67-1-5-1010). Red aril is 
believed to be eaten. 
Passifloraceae 
Passiflora ambigua Hemsl. ? (67-3-21-1102). The juicy 
pulp and seed covers are probably chewed, but then spit out. 
Lecythidaceae 
Grias fendleri Seem ? (66-6-19-1421). Seeds or material 
around seeds appear to have been eaten. 
+Gustavia superba (HBK) Berg (66-5-20-1233). The outer 
portion of this fruit is chewed off and the inner orange 
colored firm flesh is eaten. (66-8-29-0930). The new growth 
at the ends of the branches is broken off and the wood or 
soft cambium of the branch is ripped or chewed off. Cebus 
seem to break off most of the new growth on each of the 
trees, and by such pruning, may increase the number of 
branches on these trees. 
Myrtaceae 
+Eugenia choapensis Standley ? (67-5-20-1031). This 
fruit was found in May 1966, but was not observed being 

PDF PAGE 175
165 
eaten then. The thick juicy flesh of this fruit is eaten 
both when it is unripe and green, and when it is ripe and red. 
+Eugenia nestiotica Standley (67-1-3-1008). The flesh of 
this berry is scraped off with the incisors while the berry 
is held between the thumb and the base of the forefinger and 
pressed against the teeth. The seed is usually spit out. The 
flesh has an astringent quality and tastes like sawdust. 
Melastomaceae 
-t-Miconia argentea (Swartz) DC. (66-3-21-0900). Large 
bunches of these berries are broken off the branch and the 
ripe blue berries are picked off with the teeth and eaten. 
When all the ripe berries have been removed the remainder 
are dropped. 
Sapotaceae 
+Chrysophyllum Cainito L. ? (67-2-9-1315). Fruits are 
chewed and spit out. The seeds may be swallowed along with 
the sticky latex and other liquids pressed out of the flesh. 
Enders (1935, p. 447) also observed Cebus eating this species. 
+Chrysophyllum panamense Pittier (66-3-28-1145). Fruit 
is similar to that of the above species. The flesh is chewed 
and spit out, but seeds seem to be swallowed. 
Apocynaceae 
Ahovai nitida HBK (67-5-5-11^5). The inner white pulp 
may be eaten. 
Stemmadenia sp. (66-6-13-0958). The deep red pulp is 
scooped out with the incisors and eaten. The seeds are spit 
out. 

PDF PAGE 176
166 
Convolvulaceae 
+Maripa panamensTs~Hemsl-. (66-5-20-1520). The brown sticky 
pulp around the seeds is eaten. It tastes like canned prunes. 
Boraginaceae 
+Cordia bicolor A.DC. (66-5-20-1024). The berries are 
taken into the mouth and the skin is spit out. Some liquid 
is released in this way, and soluble substances are probably 
removed from the fleshy seed cover while in the gut. Seeds 
are defecated or spit out with the seed cover intact. The 
fluid released after the skin is removed tastes sweet. But, 
if the seed cover is chewed, a strongly astringent substance 
is released and the mouth becomes coated with a slippery 
material. Thus, the seed covers are probably not bitten into 
more than once by the monkeys and thereby the seed is pro­
tected from being damaged or eaten. 
+Cordia nitida Jacq. (67-4-4-0837). Same as for the above 
species. The seeds which have passed through the gut germinate. 
Solanaceae? 
+Cestrum ? (66-5-20-1330). The small green to purple 
berries are broken off the trees in bunches and the ripe 
berries are eaten. The flesh of the berry is very sweet, 
but if the small hard seed is crushed, a bad tasting sub­
stance is released. It seems most likely that the seeds 
would not be broken open by the monkeys, and that they would 
be defecated intact. 

PDF PAGE 177
167 
Bignoniaceae 
Bignoniaceous unifoliate ? (67-1-9-1026). Vine was 
partially chewed through in two places by one Cebus. 
Pods of several species of this family were broken off, 
opened, and dropped by Cebus. It is not known whether any 
part of these dry pods were eaten. 
Rubiaceae 
Alibertia edulis (L. Rich.) A. Rich. (67-I-1-0000). Cebus 
were reported to eat the fruit of this species from a tree 
in the clearing (A. Hladik, pers. com.). 
Coussarea impetiolaris Donn. Smith. (66-11-2-1259). The 
berries of this species are eaten. 
+Faramea occidentalis (L.) Rich. (66-8-29-1528). Flesh 
around seed is eaten. At first the green fruits are eaten, 
but after some ripen, only the blue colored ripe fruits are 
selected. Seeds and skins may be spit out, but some seeds 
are swallowed and defecated. Defecated seeds do germinate. 
If the flesh is chewed, a hot peppery sensation is felt on 
the tongue. 
Pentagonia macrophylla Benth. (66-9-14-1305). Flower 
was investigated and possibly some part eaten by one Cebus. 
Posoqueria latifolla ? (66-11-14-1521). Seeds from 
fruit seem to be eaten. 
+Randia armata (Swartz) DC (66-8-29-1801). Shells are 
ripped open with teeth and some seeds are picked up with the 
incisors. Other seeds are pulled out with the finger and 
put in mouth. Some seeds are spit out, others are swallowed 

PDF PAGE 178
168 
and defecated. The brown pulp around the seed is eaten. 
Tocoyena Pittieri (Standi.) Pulp around seeds as in 
above species, is eaten. Pulp tastes somewhat like prunes. 
Some seeds are swallowed and defecated, and after this are 
still able to germinate. 
(66-10-5-1640). Identified tentatively from seedlings 
as in this family by J. Duke. Flesh of fruit around seeds is 
scooped out with teeth and eaten. 
Classification Undetermined 
(66-8-16-1025)• Outer flesh of green berry eaten. 
+(66-12-30-1330). Red powdery material was observed on the 
faces of Cebus, around the mouth and nose one or more times 
daily between December 30, 1966 and January 6, 1967. Cebus 
in most cases had just come down from the canopy and usually 
within 15 or 20 minutes the coloration disappeared. It is 
suspected that some flower with red pollen was being in­
vestigated during this short period. 
(67-1-5-1012). A long section of the succulent stem of 
this seedling was eaten by one Cebus. 
(67-1-5-1038). White aril around seed is eaten. 
(67-5-16-1127). Small green berry is eaten. Berry 
contains a very astringent substance and causes throat to 
be irritated. 
(67-6-20-0928). Berries are eaten. They are very small 
and grow in large bunches. 
1 

PDF PAGE 179
169 
The list below of animal species that are eaten includes 
those that I or others have seen eaten. 
Phylum Arthropoda 
Class Arachnida 
Order Acarina 
Ticks were frequently eaten by captive animals and one 
adult female pulled at the clothing of passersby to get the 
ticks on their clothes or skin. During grooming sessions in 
the wild, particles are frequently brought to the mouth or 
removed directly from the skin with the teeth and eaten. 
Ticks may thus make up part of the normal diet. 
Order Araneida 
Spiders were found in stomach of one Cebus (M. Hladik, 
pers. com.). 
Class Insecta 
Order Orthoptera 
Tettigonidae. Several different species of grasshoppers 
and katydids are eaten. They are frequently removed from 
curled up dead leaves. One was identified as Acanthodis 
curvj.cans. In some cases the intestinal tract is pulled 
out and not eaten. 
Order Phasmatodea 
Phasmidae. Several walking sticks were eaten, some of 
them looked similar to the genus Bacteris. 
Order Isoptera 
Termites are reported to be eaten by Cebus (Enders, 1935). 

PDF PAGE 180
170 
Order Homoptera 
Cercopidae. During ten day periods in May 1966 and 1967 
there were heavy infestations of froghopper nymphs or spittle-
bugs. These insects may remove large amounts of fluid from 
the trees or other vegetation, to the point where the ground 
beneath is as wet as from a heavy rain. Spittlebugs are 
known to be able to stunt the growth of plants such as clover 
and are considered to be economic pests in the eastern U.S. 
(Borror and DeLong, 1954). Cebus eat spittlebugs heavily 
during this period. The nymphs are pulled out of the foam 
with the fingers and placed with some foam in the mouth. 
Geoffroy's marmoset also eats these spittlebugs. 
Fulgoridae. Wing fragments were removed from fecal 
material and probably belonged to a species of Cixius or a 
related genus. 
Order Coleoptera 
Grubs and adults of many species are eaten. Grubs may 
be pryed carefully out of dead or live wood with the teeth 
and fingers. During March and early April of 1966 and 1967 
Cebus spent a great deal of time extracting grubs from the 
fruit of Apeiba membranacea. The grubs are of a Mylabrid 
beetle, Amblycerus centralis (Sharp). The identification 
was verified by L. J. Bottimer. 
Order Lepidoptera 
Larvae and pupae are eaten. Some of the caterpillars 
are up to 5 or 6 inches long and almost an inch in diameter. 
They are usually pulled apart so that the intestinal tract 

PDF PAGE 181
Filmed as received 
without page(s) 
UNIVERSITY MICROFILMS. 

PDF PAGE 182
172 
can be eaten first. A few of these caterpillars appeared to 
have body hairs (stinging?) or other protrusions on them. 
Pupae are removed from their cocoons, and in at least one 
case, the last anal segments were not eaten. 
Order Diptera 
Flies and/or other insects are chased away vigorously 
when a Cebus has an open wound, but they were never seen to 
be caught and eaten as has been reported in captivity (Nolte, 
1958). Dead mosquitos were* eat"en~when~r~presented them to 
captive capuchins. Bot flies are present on the island and 
most adult howler monkeys have several larvae beneath the 
skin in the neck region. On the other hand, Cebus seem to 
be entirely free of bot fly larvae. This may be due to the 
specificity of the bot fly, or to the careful grooming 
activities of Cebus. If the eggs or young larvae of the 
bot fly are removed,- they are probably eaten. 
Order Hymenoptera 
Suborder Apocrita 
Superfamily Formicoidea 
Paracryptocerus sp. - Dead limb was broken open by a 
Cebus. Pupae and adult ants were probably eaten. 
Dendromyrmex chartifex? This species builds small silk 
lined nests on the underside of leaves. Capuchins pull off 
the leaves and lick the nests, possibly getting both adults 
and young. 

PDF PAGE 183
173 
Superfamily Vespoidea 
Vespidae. Wasps tentatively identified from nest remains 
by M. Naumann. 
Protopolybia sp. - Honey, and young, and nest material 
are eaten. 
Polybia bistriata - Same as above. 
Polybia catillifex - Same as above. 
Polybia (occidentalis group) - Same as above. 
Phylum Chordata 
Class Mammalia 
Order Rodentia 
Sciuridae. Sciurus granatensis. Two infants with their 
eyes still closed and stomachs filled with milk, were most 
likely removed from their nests. The old male of group A held 
one in each hand and was meticulously removing the skin from 
them with his incisors and eating it. After they were almost 
completely skinned, and the skin carefully chewed, he dropped 
their bodies. The specimens were collected at this point. 
The skulls and skeletons were identified by Charles Handley 
and have been placed in the collection of the U.S. National 
Museum, Smithsonian Institution. 

PDF PAGE 184
174 
LITERATURE CITED 
Aldrich, J. W., and B. P. Bole, Jr. 1937. The birds and 
mammals of the western slope of the Azuero Peninsula 
(Republic of Panama). Sci. Publications of the 
Cleveland Museum of Nat. Hist. 7: 1-195-
Allee, W. C. 1926. Distribution of animals in a tropical 
rain-forest with relation to environmental factors. 
Ecology 7: 445-468. 
Altmann, S. A. 1959- Field observations on a howling 
monkey society. J. Mammal. 40: 317-330. 
Altmann, S. A. 1962. A field study of the sociobiology of 
rhesus monkey, Macaca mulatta. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 
102: 338-435. 
Andrew, R. J. 1963. The origin and evolution of the calls 
and facial expressions of the primates. Behaviour 20: 
1-109. 
Bernstein, I. S. 1964a. A field study of the activities 
of howler monkeys. Animal Behav. 12: 92-97. 
Bernstein, I. S. 1964b. A comparison of New and Old World 
monkey social organizations and behavior. Amer. Jour. 
Physical Anthropol. 22: 233-237. 
Bernstein, I. S. 1965. Activity patterns in a Cebus monkey 
group. Folia primat. 3: 211-224. 
Bernstein, I. S. 1966. Analysis of a key role in a 
capuchin (Cebus albifrons) group. Tulane Studies Zool. 
13(2): 49-5^ 
Bernstein, I. S. 1967. Territoriality and the lutong 
(Presbytis cristatus): a field study. Amer. Zool. 
7(4): b02 (Abstr.). 
Borror, D. J., and D. M. DeLong. 1954. An introduction to 
the study of insects. Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 
New York, pp. 1-1030. 
Campbell, B, G. 1966. Human evolution. Aldine Publ. Co., 
Chicago, pp. 1-425. 
Carpenter, C. R. 1934. A field study of the behavior and 
social relations of howling monkeys. Comp. Psychol. 
Monogr, 10(2): 1-168. 

PDF PAGE 185
175 
Carpenter, C. R. 1935. Behavior of red spider monkeys in 
Panama. J. Mammal. 16(3): 171-180. 
Carpenter, C. R. 1958. Territoriality: A review of concepts 
and problems, p. 224 to 250. In A. Roe and G. G. Simpson 
(eds.), Behavior and evolution. Yale Univ. Press, New 
Haven. 
Carpenter, C. R. 1965. The howlers of Barro Colorado Island, 
• p. 250 to 291. In I. DeVore (ed.), Primate behavior. 
Holt, Rinehart and" Winston, Inc., New York. 
Chapman, F. M. 1929• My tropical air castle. D. Appleton 
& Co., New York, 417 p. 
Chapman, F. M. 1937. My monkey neighbors on Barro Colorado. 
Nat. Hist. 40: 471-479. 
Chapman, F. M. 1938. Life in an air castle. D. Appleton-
Century Co., New York. 
Collias, N. E., and C. Southwick. 1952. A field study of 
•population density and social organization in howling 
monkeys. Proc. Amer. Philos. Soc. 96: 143-156. 
Crawford, F. T. 1962. Reversal learning to spatial cues 
by monkeys. J. comp. physiol. Psychol. 55: 869. 
Darwin, C. 1965. The expressions of the emotions in man 
and animals. Univ. of Chicago Press, Chicago. 372 p. 
DeVore, I. 1965. Male dominance and mating behavior in 
baboons, p. 266 to 289. In F. A. Beach (ed.), Sex 
and behavior. John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,> New York. 
DeVore, I., and K. R. L. Hall. 1965. Baboon ecology, 
p. 20 to 52. In I. DeVore (ed.), Primate behavior. 
Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Inc., New York. 
Eisenberg, J. F., and R. E. Kuehn. 1966. The behavior of 
Ateles geoffroyi and related species. Smith. Misc. 
Coll. 151(b): 1-63. 
Enders, R. K. 1935- Mammalian life histories from Barro 
Colorado Island, Panama. Bull. Mus. Comp. Zool., 
Harvard College, 78(4): 385-502. 
Fowler, J. M., and J. B. Cope. 1964. Notes on the harpy 
eagle in British Guiana. Auk 8l: 257-273. 
Gilly, C. L. 1944. Virola guatemalensis (Heinsl.) Warb. in 
Mexico. Tropical Woods 79: 5-b. 

PDF PAGE 186
176 
Goodall, J. 1965. Chimpanzees of the Gombe Stream Reserve, 
pp. 425-473. In I. DeVore (ed.), Primate behavior. 
Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Inc., New York. 
Greenlaw, J. S. 1967. Foraging behavior of the double-toothed 
kite in association with white-faced monkeys. Auk 84: 
596-597. 
Grossman, M. L., and J. Hamlet. 1964. Birds of prey of the 
world. C. N. Potter, Inc., New York, 496 p. 
Hall, K. R. L., R. C. Boelkins, and M. J. Goswell. 1965. 
Behavior of patas monkeys, Erythrocebus patas, in 
captivity, with notes on the natural habitat. Folia 
primat. 3: 22-49. 
Hall, K. R. L., and I. DeVore. 1965- Baboon social behavior, 
p. 53 to 110. In I. DeVore (ed.), Primate behavior. 
Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Inc., New York. 
Hall, K. R. L., and B. Mayer. 1967. Social interactions in 
a group of captive patas monkeys (Erythrocebus patas). 
Folia primat. 5: 213-236. 
Hamlett, G. W. D. 1939. Reproduction in American monkeys. 
I. Estrous cycle, ovulation and menstruation in Cebus. 
Anat. Rec. 73: 17I-I87. 
Hediger, H. P. 1961. The evolution of territorial behavior, 
p. 34 to 57. In S. L. Washburn (ed.), Social life of 
early man. AlaTne Publ. Co., Chicago. 
Hershkovitz, P. 1949- Mammals of northern Columbia. Pre­
liminary report No. 4. Monkeys (Primates), with taxonomic 
revisions of some forms. Proc. U.S. Nat. Mus. 98: 
323-427. 
Hill, W. C. 0. i960. Primates. IV. Cebidae, Part A. 
Univ. Press, Edinburgh, pp. 1-523. 
Hooff, J. A. R. A. M. van. 1967. The facial displays of 
the catarrhine monkeys and apes, pp. 7-68. In D. Morris 
(ed.), Primate ethology. Aldine Publ. Co., Chicago. 
Use, D. R. 1955. Olfactory marking of territory in two 
young male loris_. Loris tardigradus lydekkerianus, kept 
in captivity in Poona. Brit. J. Anim. Behav. 3: 118-120. 
Jay, P. 1965. The common langur of north India, pp. 197-249. 
In I. DeVore (ed.), Primate behavior. Holt, Rinehart 
and Winston, Inc., New York. 

PDF PAGE 187
177 
Kaufmann, J. H. 1966. Behavior of infant rhesus monkeys and 
their mothers in a free-ranging band. Zoologica 
51: 17-28. 
KlUver, H. 1933- Behavior mechanisms in monkeys. Univ. 
Chicago Press, Chicago, 387 p. 
Klttver, H. 1937- Re-examination of implement-using behavior 
in a cebus monkey after an interval of three years. Acta 
psychol. 2: 347. 
Kortlandt, A., and M. Kooij. 1963. Protohominid behaviour 
in primates. Symp. Zool. Soc. Lond. 10: 61-88. 
KUhlhorn, F. 1939. Beobachtungen uber das Verhalten von 
Kapuzineraffen in freir Wildbahn. Z.f. tierpsychol. 
3: 147-151. 
Kummer, H., and F. Kurt. 1963. Social units of a free-living 
population of hamadryas baboons. Folia primat. 1: 4-19. 
Lancaster, J. B., and R. B. Lee. 1965. The annual repro­
ductive cycle in monkeys and apes, pp. 486-573. In 
DeVore (ed.), Primate behavior. Holt, Rinehart and 
Winston, Inc., New York. 
Loizos,-C. 1967. Play behaviour in higher primates: A 
review, pp. 176 to 218. In D. Morris (ed.), Primate 
ethology. Aldine Publ. Co., Chicago. 
Marler, P. 1965. Communication in monkeys and apes, p. 544 
to 584. In I. DeVore (ed.), Primate behavior. Holt, 
Rinehart and Winston, Inc., New York. 
Moynihan, M. H. 1964. Some behaVior patterns of platyrrhine 
monkeys. I. The night monkey (Aotus trivirgatus). 
Smith. Misc. Coll. l46(5): 1-84. 
Moynihan, M. H. 1966. Communication in the titi monkey, 
Callicebus. J. Zool., Lond. 150: 77-127. 
Moynihan, M. H. 1967. Comparative aspects of communication 
in New World primates, p. 236 to 266. In D. Morris 
(ed.), Primate ethology. Aldine Publ. Co., Chicago. 
Nolte, A. 1958. Beobachtungen tfber das Instinktverhalten 
von Kapuzineraffen (Cebus apella L.) in der Gefangenschaft 
Behaviour 12: 183-207. 
Nolte, A., and G. Du'cker. 1959. Jugendentwicklung eines 
Kapuzineraffen (Cebus apella) mit besonderer berucksich-
tigung des wechselseitigen verhaltens von Mutter und Kind. 
Behaviour 14: 335-373. 

PDF PAGE 188
178 
Ochse, J. J. 1931. Fruits and fruitculture in the Dutch 
East Indies. G. Kloff & Co., Batavia-Centrum. 
Plotnik, R. J., F. A. King, and L. Roberts. 1966. Compari­
son of social organization in two New World Monkeys: 
Saimiri scuireus and Cebus albifrons. Proc. Amer. 
Psychol. Assn. 2: 157-I5B. 
Reynolds, V., and F. Reynolds. 1965. Chimpanzees of Budongo 
Forest, p. 368 to 424. In I. DeVore (ed.), Primate 
behavior. Holt, Rineharx~and Winston, Inc., New York. 
Ripley, S. 1967. Intertroop encounters among Ceylon gray 
langurs (Presbytis entellus), p. 237 to 254. In S. A. 
Altmann (ed.), Social communication among primaTes. 
Univ. of Chicago Press, Chicago. 
Schaller, G. B. I963. The mountain gorilla. Univ. Chicago 
Press, Chicago, 431 p. 
Schultz, A. H. i960. Age changes and variability in the 
skulls and teeth of the Central American monkeys Alouatta, 
Cebus and Ateles. Proc. Zool. Soc. Lond. 133: 337-390. 
Shell, W. F., and A. J. Riopelle. 1958. Progressive dis­
crimination learning in platyrrhine monkeys. J. comp. 
physiol. Psychol. 51:467. 
Sparks, J. 1967. Allogrooming in primates: A review, p. 148 
to 175. In D. Morris (ed.), Primate ethology. Aldine 
Publ. Co., Chicago. 
Standley, P. C. 1933. Flora of Barro Colorado Island, 
Panama. Contr. Arnold Arboretum, Harvard Univ., No. 5, 
pp. I-I78. 
Stott, K., Jr. 1947. Fairy bluebird—long-tailed macaque 
association on Mindanao. Auk 64: 130. 
Stott, K., Jr., and C. J. Selsor. 1961. Association of 
trogons and monkeys on Barro Colorado. Condor 63: 508. 
Sugiyama, Y. 1967. Social organization of hanuman langurs, 
p. 221 to 236. In S. A. Altmann (ed.), Social communica­
tion among primaTes. Univ. of Chicago Press, Chicago. 
Tembrock, G. I963. Acoustic behaviour of mammals, p. 751 
to 786. In R, G. Busnel (ed.), Acoustic behaviour of 
animals. Elsevier, New York. 
Theberge, J. B., and J. B. Falls. 1967. Howling as a means 
of communication in timber wolves. Amer. Zool. 7: 331-
338. 
I 

PDF PAGE 189
179 
Vevers, G. M. and J. S. Weiner. 1-963. Use of a tool by a 
captive capuchin monkey (Cebus apella). Symp. Zool. 
Soc. Lond. 10: 115-118. 
Walker, E. P. 1964. Mammals of the world. Volume I. Johns 
Hopkins Press, Baltimore, 644 p. 
\ 

PDF PAGE 190
180 
VITA 
John Reed Oppenheimer was born on October 10, 194l in 
New York City. He attended Stuyvesant High School in New 
York City, Hiram College in Ohio, and received his B.A. with 
honors from the University of Connecticut, Storrs, in 1963. 
He received his M.S. in Zoology in 1965 from the University 
of Illinois, Urbana. 
In the summers of 1962 and 1963 he held an appointment 
as a special Research Technician in Zoology at the University 
of Connecticut. From September 1963 to August 1964 he held 
a position as a half-time graduate research assistant, and 
during the academic years of 1964-1965 and 1967-1968 he was 
employed as a half-time graduate teaching assistant in the 
Department of Zoology, University of Illinois. He presently 
holds a position as a Research Associate in the Department 
of Pathobiology, School of Hygiene and Public Health, at 
the Johns Hopkins University. 
He was awarded a New York State Regents College Scholar­
ship in 1959, and participated in the N.S.F. Undergraduate 
Program during the academic year of 1962-1963. He has also 
received an N.S.F. Summer Fellowship, a Predoctoral Internship 
from the Smithsonian Institution, and a Public Health Service 
Fellowship through the National Institute of Mental Health. 
His master's research was done on the paternal behavior 
in Tilapia macrocephala, a cichlid fish; and his doctoral 

PDF PAGE 191
181 
research was done on the behavior and ecology of the white-
faced monkey, Cebus capucinus, on Barro Colorado Island, in 
the Canal Zone. 
He is a member of the AAAS, AIBS, the Ecological Society 
of America, the Animal Behavior Society, and the American 
Society of Mammalogists. He has also been elected to member­
ship in Phi Beta Kappa, Sigma Xi, Beta Beta Beta, and Phi Sigma. 
At the present time he has one paper in press and four 
publications: 
Molar cup pattern variations and their interrelationships in 
the meadow vole, Microtus p. pennsylvanicus (Ord). Amer. Midi. 
Natur. 74(1): 39-49, 1965. 
Dynamics of parental behavior in the black chinned mouthbreeder, 
Tilapi macrocephala (Pisces: Cichlidae). Bull. Ecol. Soc. 
Amer. 46(4): l8l, 1965. (Abstr.). 
Vocal communication in the white-faced monkey, Cebus capucinus, 
Amer. Zool. 7(4): 802, 1967. (Abstr.). 
The diet of Cebus capucinus and the affect of Cebus on the 
vegetation. Bull. Ecol. Soc. Amer. 48(3): 138, 1967. (Abstr.). 
He has studied under R. M. Wetzel, G. W. Barlow, M. H. 
Moynihan, and E. M. Banks, in that order. 