PDF PAGE 1
1
Scientific  RepoRts  | 6:28380 | DOI: 10.1038/srep28380
www.nature.com/scientificreports
Flexible decision-making relative 
to reward quality and tool 
functionality in Goffin cockatoos 
(Cacatua goffiniana)
I. B. Laumer1, T. Bugnyar1 & A. M. I. Auersperg2
Decisions involving the use of tools may require an agent to consider more levels of relational 
complexity than merely deciding between an immediate and a delayed option. Using a new 
experimental approach featuring two different types of tools, two apparatuses as well as two different 
types of reward, we investigated the Goffin cockatoos’ ability to make flexible and profitable decisions 
within five different setups. Paralleling previous results in primates, most birds overcame immediate 
drives in favor of future gains; some did so even if tool use involved additional work effort. Furthermore, 
at the group level subjects maximized their profit by simultaneously considering both the quality of an 
immediate versus a delayed food reward (accessible with a tool) and the functionality of the available 
tool. As their performance levels remained stable across trials in all testing setups, this was unlikely the 
result of a learning effect. The Goffin cockatoos’ ability to focus on relevant information was constrained 
when all task components (both food qualities, both apparatuses and both tools) were presented at the 
same time.
The ability to flexibly decide whether or not to sacrifice an immediate option in the prospect of a more profitable 
option is likely associated to high levels of delay tolerance and cognitive plasticity. So far, among non-human 
animals, there is evidence that some primates, dogs, corvids and parrots can overcome immediate drives for more 
than a couple of seconds in order to maximize their future profits and can flexibly assess costs and benefits of an 
action before executing it (e.g. refs 1–10).
Nevertheless, in decision-making processes in natural situations there are often more levels of relational com-
plexity involved than merely deciding between an immediate and a delayed option. In order to maximize profit 
an agent may, for example, need to take into account the predictability (e.g. refs 11–14), the reachability, as well as 
the presence and/or the functionality of available means to obtain a goal. In natural contexts, all these decisions 
may also need to be traded off against an immediately available, but less preferred option. Despite the substantial 
number of studies on animal decision-making, only a few primate studies include tool use in their task design: 
Tufted capuchin monkeys (Sapajus spp.) were able to delay eating a rod-shaped food (celery or pretzel) in order 
to use it as a tool to get access to a more preferred food (peanut butter in a tube). When the respective apparatus 
was not baited, all subjects immediately ate the initial rod-shaped food item
15. Correspondingly, in an exchange 
task tufted capuchins flexibly traded a food item for a tool solely if the tool could be used for obtaining food of 
higher quality
16. Chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes) and an orangutan (Pongo abelii) chose a tool over an immediate 
preferred food reward (grape) to use it 70 minutes later for obtaining a more preferred fruit soup17.
The latter tasks designs have been limited to tool using primates. As yet, therefore, it is unclear whether sim-
ilar abilities could have evolved in other species, or whether the cognitive link between tool use and self control 
is an adaptive specialization to tool use. Corvids and parrots may represent promising candidate species as they 
seem to possess high levels of impulse control in delay of gratification tasks
2,5,7 and some species have shown the 
capacity for flexible tool use (e.g. refs 18–21). Goffin cockatoos may represent an appropriate parrot model for 
investigating such tool related decision-making. They are feeding generalists
22 and show high levels of cognitive 
1Department of Cognitive Biology, University of Vienna, Althanstr. 14, 1090, Vienna, Austria. 2Comparative 
Cognition, Messerli Research Institute, University of Veterinary Medicine, Veterinärplatz 1, 1210, Vienna, Medical 
University of Vienna, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria. Correspondence and requests for materials should be 
addressed to I.B.L. (email: isabelle.laumer@univie.ac.at)
received: 18 January 2016
a ccepted: 03 June 2016
Published: 23 June 2016
OPEN

PDF PAGE 2
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
2
Scientific  RepoRts  | 6:28380 | DOI: 10.1038/srep28380
plasticity in a number of different problem solving tasks 18,19,23,24 . Furthermore, Goffin cockatoos tested in an 
exchange task were able to control an immediate impulse for up to 80 seconds to maximize a qualitative payoff. 
There was also evidence for plasticity in their decision-making, as subjects exchanged significantly more often for 
their most preferred food than for their second preferred food
2. In contrast to species such as the New Caledonian 
crow25, Goffin cockatoos do not depend on tool-obtained food and are unlikely to be habitual tool users in the 
wild (recent field observations did not show any evidence of object insertions; unpublished data). However they 
have repeatedly shown complex forms of tool use and tool manufacture under laboratory conditions
18,19.
This study investigates the flexibility of decision-making in Goffin cockatoos using a series of tool selection 
tasks. Specifically, we give birds binary choice tests and examine whether they can discriminate between the 
quality of an immediate available food reward and a food reward that can only be accessed with a tool (similar 
to primates
15–17, while also taking into account the functionality of the available tool. We use a new experimen-
tal approach featuring two different types of tools (stick and ball, see methods) and their respective appara-
tuses (stick- and tube-apparatus, see methods) as well as two highly desired, although differently preferred, food 
rewards of different qualities. Specifically, we want to examine to what degree subjects can make binary decisions 
i) relative to the difference in quality of an immediate food reward (located outside of the apparatus) versus a food 
reward located inside of the apparatus and the presence of a tool (as shown in primates
15–17) and ii) relative to the 
functionality of the available tool in the context at hand.
We set up five tests (Tool selection test (TST), Motivation test (MT), Quality allocation test (QAT), Tool func-
tionality test (TFT) and Tool selection/quality allocation test (TSQAT); for detailed description see methods) in 
order to dissociate several aspects of tool related decision-making. These include tool selection, flexible value 
attribution to food rewards and tools, work effort, individual motivation, and the ability to focus on relevant 
task affordances to maximize the outcome (see methods). We hypothesize that the value of a tool relative to a 
food item should change depending upon its utility: the optimal strategy would be to only choose a tool over an 
immediate food reward if the present apparatus is accessible with the available tool and if the difference in quality 
between the immediate food item and the food item inside the apparatus is sufficiently high to compensate the 
work effort. Optimizing subjects should not choose the tool over the immediate food reward in controls in which 
the tool is non- functional or when the immediate food is of the same or of higher quality as the reward offered 
inside the apparatus. Furthermore, when confronted with more than one apparatuses, the subject should choose 
the tool functional for the apparatus containing the food of the highest quality. Given that Goffin cockatoos are 
able to accomplish tool use and to inhibit eating a preferred food item over extended delays to exchange it for a 
food of higher quality
2,18,19, we expected them to choose a tool over a low quality immediate reward to obtain a 
high quality reward. We had no a priori expectation on whether or not the birds could handle the relational com-
plexity of making profitable decisions also in regard to the functionality of the available tool.
Results
The GLMM for the pretest (tool selection test, TST) showed a significant effect for ‘Group’ (after being tested in the 
TST, subjects were split up into two groups; each group received the following tests in a different order; for details 
see methods; F =  7.993, df1 =  1, df2 =  20, p =  0.01, Coefficient =  1.375, SE =  0.922). The GLMM for the quality 
allocation test (QAT) showed a significant effect for the ‘location of the most preferred food item’ (inside vs. out-
side the apparatus; see methods for details; F =  4.868, df1 =  1, df2 =  47, p =  0.036). No other effects were found 
in the remaining GLMMs for the following tests (for details of the GLMMs see methods; for detailed statistical 
results see SI, section A, Table S1).
Pretest: Tool selection test (TST). When the stick apparatus alongside both tools was present, all birds 
chose the correct tool significantly above chance level (one sample Wilcoxon Test, Group A: T+ =  21; pexact =  0.031, 
n =  6; Group B: T+ =  26, pexact =  0.047, n =  7; see Fig. 1.1). Birds of Group A showed a non-significant tendency to 
choose the correct tool more often in the condition in which the stick apparatus was present than birds of Group B  
(Mann-Whitney U Test, U =  8, p =  0.074, nGroupA =  6, nGroupB =  7). In the tube apparatus condition, there was 
no difference between the groups (Mann-Whitney U Test, U =  13, p =  0.280, nGroupA =  6, nGroupB =  7). Subjects 
chose the ball tool significantly more than expected by chance when the tube apparatus was present (one sam-
ple Wilcoxon test; T
+ =  90, pexact <  0.001, n =  13; see Fig. 1.1). There was no significant difference between the 
birds’ choice in the stick- and the tube-apparatus condition (paired Wilcoxon test; T+ =  52, pexact =  0.685, n =  13). 
Nevertheless, there was a learning effect when the stick apparatus was present: subjects correctly chose the stick 
significantly more often in the last six trials than in the first six trials (paired Wilcoxon test; T
+ =  79, pexact =  0.017, 
n =  13). This was the only condition throughout the entire experiment for which we detected a learning effect (for 
detailed statistical results see SI, section A, Table S2).
Motivation test (MT).  As expected from an optimizing agent (avoiding work effort), subjects chose the 
immediate food more often than the tool when the food types outside and inside the apparatus were of the 
same quality (subject’s most preferred food MPF; see methods below; one sample Wilcoxon test; stick-apparatus: 
T
+ =  76, pexact =  0.033, n =  13; tube-apparatus: T+ =  88, pexact =  0.001, n =  13; see Fig. 1.2). Subjects’ choices did 
not differ between the stick- or tube-apparatus conditions (Paired Wilcoxon test; T+ =  64, pexact =  0.216, n =  13).
Quality allocation test (QAT). As expected from an optimizing agent, subjects chose the functional tool 
over their third preferred food (TPF , see methods), when the most preferred food (MPF) was located inside the 
apparatus, (One sample Wilcoxon test; stick-apparatus: T
+ =  81, pexact =  0.010, n =  13; tube-apparatus: T+ =  89, 
pexact <  0.001, n =  13; see Fig. 1.3). Specifically when the TPF was located inside the tube-apparatus, subjects chose 
the MPF over the tool above chance expectation (One sample Wilcoxon test; T+ =  79, pexact =  0.017, n =  13). In 
the stick-apparatus condition, subjects tended to choose their MPF over the tool (One sample Wilcoxon test; 

PDF PAGE 3
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
3
Scientific  RepoRts  | 6:28380 | DOI: 10.1038/srep28380
T+ =  72, pexact =  0.068, n =  13). There was a non-significant trend to making more correct choices when the MPF 
was inside rather than outside the apparatus in the stick-apparatus condition (Paired Wilcoxon test; T + =  70,  
pexact =  0.080, n =  13) but not in the ball-apparatus condition (Paired Wilcoxon test; T + =  59, pexact =  0.376, 
n =  13).
Tool functionality test (TFT).  As expected from an optimizing agent, subjects chose the tool over the 
TPF when the tool was functional (One sample Wilcoxon test; stick-apparatus: T + =  81, pexact =  0.010, n =  13; 
tube-apparatus: T+ =  84, pexact =  0.005, n =  13). In contrast, subjects chose the TPF over the tool when the tool 
was non-functional (One sample Wilcoxon test; stick-apparatus: T+ =  85, pexact =  0.003, n =  13; tube-apparatus: 
T+ =  85, pexact =  0.003, n =  13; see Fig. 1.4).
Tool selection/quality allocation test (TSQAT). In contrast to the other tests, subjects did not optimize 
their payoff above chance expectation when both apparatuses as well as both food qualities were present and they 
could choose one of both tool types (One sample Wilcoxon test; stick-apparatus: T+ =  47, pexact =  0.946, n =  13; 
tube-apparatus: T+ =  52, pexact =  0.685, n =  13; see Fig. 1.5). The subjects’ decision was not based on a side pref-
erence (Chi-square test; for all birds p >  0.05; for details see Table S3 in SI, section B). However, seven subjects 
showed a tool preference (Chi-square test; all p <  0.01), with three birds preferring the ball over the stick and four 
birds preferring the stick over the ball (see Table S4 in SI, section B). Further, after tool selection, 12 out of 13 sub-
jects operated the apparatus for which their preferred tool was functional significantly above chance expectation 
(see Table S5 in SI, section B).
Individual Performance. In each of the previous testing conditions except the TSQAT,  some individuals 
performed spontaneously above or close to chance expectation (see SI section C for detailed individual results).
Five birds chose the profitable option in the stick- and/or tube-apparatus conditions in the MT above 
chance level (see SI, section C, Table S7). In the QAT , five subjects instantly chose the more profitable option 
above chance level in both conditions of the stick- and/or tube-apparatus. Three more birds tended to do so  
(SI, section C, Table S8). In the TFT, three birds significantly chose the profitable option in both test conditions 
of the stick- and/or tube-apparatus (SI, section C, Table S9). One more bird tended to do so. Goffin cockatoo 
“Muppet” instantly passed all conditions of the ball- and/or stick-apparatus condition of the MT, QAT and TFT. 
Figure 1. Mean percentages of correct/profitable choices for each condition within each test (1) TST, (2) MT, 
(3) QAT, (4) TFT, (5) TSQAT; n =  13). * p-value significantly above chance expectation. (MPF =  most preferred 
food; TPF =  third preferred food).

PDF PAGE 4
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
4
Scientific  RepoRts  | 6:28380 | DOI: 10.1038/srep28380
Based on performance in the TFT and/or the QAT, alternative learning strategies are plausible for a few subjects, 
but unlikely for the majority of individuals (see SI, section D).
Discussion
After being trained to use two types of tools, Goffin cockatoos were able to attribute each tool to its respective 
apparatus once given a choice in a tool selection test. Like habitually tool-using primates 15–17, most cockatoos 
did overcome immediate drives in favor of future gains, some even when this implied tool use as a work effort. 
Critically, at group level, subjects also succeeded in all tasks involving different levels of relational complexity. They 
could: i) Simultaneously consider the presence of an available tool as well as the difference in food quality between 
the immediate food and the food inside the apparatus; ii) at the same time attend to the functionality of the avail-
able tool in that context. As their performance levels did not improve across trials in the respective tests (QAT , 
MT, TFT), this was unlikely the result of learning. The cockatoos’ failure in the last test (TSQAT), in which six 
dimensions had to be considered simultaneously, indicates possible limitations in their information processing.
In the MT both options, choosing the tool as well as accessing the immediate food item, led to the same payoff. 
Here, subjects chose the food over the tool above chance expectation on the group level and some on the individ-
ual level. Goffin cockatoos show strong tendencies for complex, unrewarded object manipulation in- and outside 
of the foraging context
24,26. Nevertheless, using a tool in the experiment seems to be judged as an additional work 
effort by some subjects and is therefore included in the decision-making process. In contrast, when the respective 
tool led to a higher payoff than the immediately available one (QAT), the effort for using a tool seemed to be com-
pensated: On group level, subjects chose the tool significantly more often than the immediate food reward. They 
rarely selected the tool in control trials, in which the immediate food item was of higher quality than the reward 
located inside the apparatus. The previous results are in line with findings on habitually tool using primates (see 
introduction
15–17 ): Tufted capuchin monkeys, one orangutan and chimpanzees were able to inhibit eating an 
immediate food reward if a more preferred food reward could be obtained by using/choosing a tool (although 
different task designs were employed). Beyond this, Goffin cockatoos seem to have the capacity to not only to 
consider the difference in food quality but also the functionality of the available tool (TFT). Subjects chose the 
immediate, lower quality food item over the tool when the offered tool was non-functional but chose the tool over 
the immediate lower quality food when the respective tool was functional. To our knowledge, such a task design 
has not yet been applied to primates.
Nevertheless, the Goffins’ group results need to be regarded with some caution: On an individual level, birds 
chose the correct option either above or close to conventional significance levels in some but not all of the test-
ing conditions. However, a few subjects (notably the male Muppet and the female Moneypenny) continuously 
showed high performance levels in nearly all conditions of the two tests. Although individual performance is 
not always consistent, in some animals alternative individual strategies seemed apparent (see SI section D for a 
more detailed description). For example subject “Figaro” chose the non-functional ball tool over the TPF when 
confronted with the stick-apparatus in his first trial of the TFT. During the time interval before the next trial, he 
manufactured a tool of the required length out of the armrest of the chair (Figaro had made tools before out of 
wooden blocks, see ref. 18) and successfully retrieved the reward (see Movie S2, SI section E). In the following 
trials, Figaro often continued to choose the non-functional tool over the TPF and attempted to manufacture the 
adequate tool in the time between trials to access his MPF located inside the apparatus.
In the final task (TSQAT), subjects seemed unable to focus their attention on all relevant cues at the same time 
and subsequently could not maximize their profit when both apparatuses, both food qualities as well as both tools 
were present simultaneously. In this task, subjects seemed to limit their attention to the functionality of their 
preferred tool rather than to the difference in food quality of the apparatuses’ contents: they typically operated 
the apparatus for which their preferred tool was functional, even though it contained the low quality food in half 
of the occasions. Since they were given 30 seconds prior to the decision-making event, we believe we can rule out 
that this was due to insufficient inspection time. Relational complexity increases with the number of dimensions 
that must be considered simultaneously
27 (QAT/TFT: one apparatus, one tool, two food types; TSQAT: two appa-
ratuses, two tools, two food types). It seems possible that subjects faced some overload/limits: A plausible limit 
could be the cognitive capacity to flexibly recombine all relevant information when the task at hand required 
considering more than four factors at the same time. Nevertheless, the animals’ failure of the TSQAT could also 
be due to perceptual, attentional, or working memory constraints, or a combination of some of these factors
28.
Overall, the results of this study illustrate that tool related decision-making relative to a gain in quality is 
neither limited to primates nor to adaptive specialists but can arise from relatively general modes of cognitive 
processing. In this case, these are most likely a combination of high behavioural flexibility, sensorimotor and 
impulse control. Goffin cockatoos seem to be able to incorporate the functionality of the tool at hand as an addi-
tional component into their decision-making process. Within this study, the Goffins did however, hit a limit in 
terms of working memory capacity with subjects being unable to consider a total of six task components simulta-
neously. As tool related decision-making beyond selection tasks (e.g. refs 20, 29–31) has not yet been addressed 
in birds and other non-primates, our understanding of the mechanisms involved in this type of multidimensional 
decision-making is still in its infancy. It would represent an important next step to probe its limits systematically 
in a broader range of species, for example incorporating specialist tool-makers such as New Caledonian crows.
Methods
Subjects & housing. We tested 13 adult Goffin cockatoos, five females and eight males (hatched between 
2007 and 2011; see SI, Table S11, Section F). All subjects were hand-raised and are permanently kept in a large, 
enriched aviary (indoors: 45 m
2 ground space, 3–6 m high wall to gable; outdoors: 150 m2 ground space, 3–4.5 m 
high). Food consisting of a selection of fresh fruits, seeds, various protein sources, minerals and fresh drinking 
water were available ad libitum. The indoor area was kept above 20 °C from October through May.

PDF PAGE 5
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
5
Scientific  RepoRts  | 6:28380 | DOI: 10.1038/srep28380
All animals had CITES certificates and were registered at the district’s administrative animal welfare bureau 
(Bezirkshauptmannschaft St. Pölten Schmiedgasse 4–6, A-3100; St. Pölten, Austria). These housing conditions 
comply with the Austrian Federal Act on the Protection of Animals (Animal Protection Act –§ 24 Abs. 1 Z 1 
and 2; § 25 Abs. 3 – TSchG, BGBl. I Nr. 118/2004 Art. 2). As all experiments were appetitive, non-invasive and 
based exclusively on behavioural tests, they are not classified as animal experiments under the Austrian Animal 
Experiments Act (§ 2. Federal Law Gazette No. 501/1989). All birds were marked with coloured leg bands for 
identification.
All birds had experience with individual testing in problem solving tasks: a sequential lock problem
24, 
Piagetian object permanence 23 and a food exchange task (2, see introduction). Most subjects had experience 
inserting compact tools into a vertical tube (unpublished data) and four subjects (Figaro, Kiwi, Dolittle & Pipin) 
had experience retrieving a reward from behind a wire mesh using a stick tool
18,19.
Apparatus. Prior to testing, all subject received training with the two individual apparatuses used in this 
experiment (see Supplementary Information SI, section G for details). Before testing started, all birds could reli-
ably retrieve food from each apparatus when the respective tool was present. We used two different apparatuses 
(tube & stick) and two types of tools (ball & stick) in this experiment. The tube-apparatus was a transparent food 
box with a vertical tube on top. The top bit of the tube was slanted, hindering the insertion of a stick-type tool (see 
Fig. 2). The reward rested on a collapsible platform inside the box. When a ball-shaped tool was inserted at the top 
opening of the tube, the platform collapsed and the food was released to the subject at the lower end of the box. 
The stick apparatus was a transparent rectangular box with a central opening (ca. 1.3 cm). The food reward rested 
on a small platform on a slanted plate inside the box. The reward could be poked off the platform by inserting a 
stick through the central opening and was released to the subject at the lower end of the box (see Fig. 2).
Food preference tests. The three most preferred food rewards (always fully eaten) out of an original choice 
of 20 different food types were selected. Prior to testing, subjects received a food quality preference test in which 
relative preferences for the three foods were identified. To ensure that all foods were desirable but with a clear 
distinction in preference, we picked the most preferred and the third preferred out of the three for testing. To con-
trol for preference changes, food preferences were retested three times during the testing phase and, if necessary, 
an additional desirable food type was added to confirm that the most preferred food (MPF) was chosen over the 
third preferred food (TPF) in a minimum of 80% of binary choices. Subjects received the selected food types for 
the entire duration of the data collection only in test conditions (see SI section H for details).
Testing set-ups and procedure. All subjects participated in five tests (Fig. 3). The tests were conducted in 
two different orders to control for the possibility that the order of the tests might influence subjects’ performances 
in the subsequent tests. Prior to testing, the cockatoos were randomly divided into two equal groups (see SI, sec-
tion F , Table S11). Group A first completed the Tool Selection Test (TST), then the Quality Allocation Test (QAT), 
the Motivation Test (MT), the Tool Functionality Test (TFT) and finally the Tool Selection/Quality Allocation 
Test (TSQAT). Group B also started with the TST, but then completed the MT, the TFT, the QAT and the TSQAT. 
Within each test, the conditions were presented in a semi-randomized order across sessions.
Pretest: Tool selection test (TST).  As a critical first test, the TST  investigated whether the cockatoos 
could select the functional tool. There were two possible conditions: either the stick- or the tube-apparatus 
(semi-randomized order across sessions), baited with subjects’ MPF , was placed on the experimental table (see 
Fig. 3.1, see Movie S1 in SI section E). Subjects received a minimum of two sessions of 12 trials in total in which 
they had to choose between the stick- and the ball-tool. As success in the TST was a precondition to enter further 
testing, it continued until subjects reached criterion (at least 83% of correct decisions in two consecutive sessions).
Motivation test (MT). The MT tested whether subjects had acquired a preference for the immediate food 
or for the food inside the apparatus. The subjects’ most preferred food (MPF) was located outside as well as 
inside the apparatus. The tool was always functional. There were two possible conditions: either the stick- or the 
Figure 2. Left: The tube apparatus can only be operated by inserting a ball-shaped tool. The reward rests on a 
collapsible platform. Right: The stick apparatus can only be operated by inserting the stick through the upper 
hole and by poking the reward off a wooden platform.

PDF PAGE 6
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
6
Scientific  RepoRts  | 6:28380 | DOI: 10.1038/srep28380
tube-apparatus was placed on the experimental table (see Fig. 3.2; see Movie S1 in SI section E). Both conditions 
were presented in a semi- randomized order across sessions. Subjects received a total of two sessions of 12 trials.
Quality allocation test (QAT). The QAT tested whether subjects could increase profit by choosing a tool 
over an immediate food reward depending on the location of the higher quality food. One food reward was located 
inside, the other food reward outside the apparatus. The apparatus contained either the subjects’ MPF or TPF (in 
50% of trials, semi-randomly balanced). The available tool was always functional (stick- or ball-tool depending 
on the apparatus present). There were four possible conditions that were presented in a semi- randomized order 
across sessions (see Fig. 3.3, see Movie S1 in SI section E). The QAT comprised four sessions of 12 trials.
Tool functionality test (TFT). The TFT tested whether subjects could correctly assess the functionality of a 
tool to increase profit. Subjects faced binary decisions between the TPF and either a functional or non-functional 
tool (in 50% of trials; semi-randomly balanced). The apparatus always contained the subjects’ MPF . There were 
four possible conditions that were presented in a semi- randomized order across sessions (see Fig. 3.4, see Movie 
S1 in SI section E). Subjects received a total of four sessions of 12 trials.
Tool selection/quality allocation test (TSQAT).  The TSQAT tested if subjects could maximize their 
profit when all task components were present. Both apparatuses were placed on the experimental table contain-
ing food of different qualities (TPF and MPF). There were two possible conditions in which the MPF was either 
located inside the stick- or tube-apparatus (see Fig. 3.5, see Movie S1 in SI section E). The conditions were pre-
sented in a semi- randomized order across sessions. The TSQAT comprised two sessions of 12 trials.
Testing procedure. During testing, the experimenter was standing at the experimental table while the bird 
was sitting opposite on the backrest of a chair (starting position). One of the two apparatuses was placed in centre 
of the table (semi-randomly balanced across sessions for each testing condition). The subject was asked to step 
up on the experimenter’s hand and was briefly lifted towards the apparatus to give it the opportunity to inves-
tigate its content (depending on the test it contained either the MPF or the TPF; see Movie S1 in SI section E). 
Thereafter, the bird was placed back into the starting position from where it could clearly see the apparatus’s con-
tent. Depending on the condition, subjects faced binary choices either between two tools or a tool and a food item 
placed on the right and left side of the apparatus. For all conditions, the side of presentation was semi-randomly 
balanced across sessions. Thereafter, the experimenter signalled the subjects to wait for three seconds extending 
her arm over the centre of the apparatus with the palm facing towards the subject. Subsequently, the bird was 
Figure 3. The conditions within each testing setup. (1) TST: both tools are present and MPF (most preferred 
food) is inside; (2) MT: functional tool is present, MPF is inside and outside; (3) QAT: functional tool is present; 
left: MPF is inside (depending on the condition either the tube or stick apparatus is present), TPF (third 
preferred food) is outside; right: MPF is outside, TPF is inside; (4) TFT: MPF is inside and TPF is outside;  
left: functional tool is present; right: non-functional tool is present; (5) TSQAT: both tools and both apparatuses 
are present; left: MPF is in tube apparatus; right: MPF is in stick apparatus.

PDF PAGE 7
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
7
Scientific  RepoRts  | 6:28380 | DOI: 10.1038/srep28380
allowed to leave its starting position. Once an option was touched, the other was immediately removed (see Movie 
S1 in SI section E). If subjects chose the non-functional tool, they had to wait in front of the apparatus for 30 sec-
onds until the beginning of the next trial. During testing, the experimenter wore mirrored sunglasses, avoided any 
head or facial movements and was not speaking.
Analysis. All data was HD video recorded (JVC HD Everio Camcorder GZ-HM30) and coded in situ as well 
as from the videos. We conducted a Generalized Linear Mixed Model (GLMM) in IBM SPSS for each test (TST, 
MT, QAT, TFT, TSQAT) with ‘Sex’ , ‘Group (order in which tests were received)’ and ‘Type of apparatus (stick or 
tube)’ as fixed effect factors and ‘Subject’ as random effect factor. As response variable, we used the number of 
correct choices out of the total of 12 trials for each test. For QAT, we additionally looked at ‘MPF inside/outside 
apparatus’ as fixed effect; for TFT we additionally looked at ‘Tool functional/non-functional’ . As the data did 
not meet the criteria for parametric analysis, we used non-parametric two-tailed statistics for further analysis. 
Statistical tests were conducted in IBM SPSS using exact procedures. To investigate a possible learning effect we 
additionally ran a pairwise comparison (paired Wilcoxon tests, p <  0.05) for the first and last six trials of each 
condition for each test. Although testing was carried out until criterion in the TST, only performance in the first 
two sessions was analysed.
References
1. Addessi, E., Paglieri, F . & Focaroli, V . The ecological rationality of delay tolerance: Insights from capuchin monkeys. Cognition 119, 
142–147 (2011).
2. Auersperg, A. M. I., Laumer, I. B. & Bugnyar, T. Goffin cockatoos wait for qualitative and quantitative gains but prefer ‘better’ to 
‘ m o r e’.  Biol Lett 9, 20121092 (2013).
3. Beran, M. J. Maintenance of self-imposed delay of gratification by four chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes) and an orangutan (Pongo 
pygmaeus). J Gen Psychol 129(1), 49–66 (2002).
4. Dufour, V ., Pelé, M., Sterck, E. H. M. & Thierry, B. Chimpanzee (Pan troglodytes) anticipation of food return: Coping with waiting 
time in an exchange task. J Comp Psych 121(2), 145–155 (2007).
5. Dufour, V ., Wascher, C. A. F ., Braun, A., Miller, R. & Bugnyar, T. Corvids can decide if a future exchange is worth waiting for. Biol 
Lett 8(2), 201–204 (2011).
6. Evans, T. A. & Beran, M. J. Chimpanzees use self-distraction to cope with impulsivity. Biol Lett 3, 599–602 (2007).
7. Hillemann, F ., Bugnyar, T., Kotrschal, K. & Wascher, C. A. F . Waiting for better, not for more: corvids respond to quality in two delay 
maintenance tasks. Anim Behav 90, 1–10 (2014).
8. Leonardi, R. J., Vick, S.-J. & Dufour, V . Waiting for more: the performance of domestic dogs (Canis familiaris) on exchange tasks. 
Anim Cogn 15, 107–120 (2012).
9. Pelé, M., Dufour, V ., Micheletta, J. & Thierry, B. Long-tailed macaques display unexpected waiting abilities in exchange tasks. Anim 
Cogn 13, 263–271 (2010).
10. Rosati, A. G., Stevens, J. R., Hare, B. & Hauser, M. D. The evolutionary origins of human patience: temporal preferences in 
chimpanzees, bonobos and human adults. Curr Bio 17, 1663–1668 (2007).
11. Bateson, M. & Kacelnik, A. Starlings’ preferences for predictable and unpredictable delays to food. Anim Behav 53, 1129–1142 (1997).
12. Bateson, M. Context-dependent foraging choices in risk-sensitive starlings. Anim Behav 64, 251–260 (2002).
13. Pelé, M., Broihanne, M. H., Thierry, B., Call, J. & Dufour, V . To bet or not to bet? Decision-making under risk in non-human 
primates. J Risk Uncertain 49, 141–166 (2014).
14. Shapiro, M. S., Schuck-Paim, C. & Kacelnik, A. Risk sensitivity for amounts of and delay to rewards: Adaption for uncertainty or 
by-product of reward rate maximizing? Behav Processess 89, 104–114 (2012).
15. Evans, T. A. & Westergaard, G. C. Self-control and tool use in tufted capuchin monkeys (Cebus apella ). J Comp Psych 120(2), 
163–166 (2006).
16. Westergaard, G. C., Liv, C., Rocca, A. M., Cleveland, A. & Suomi, S. J. Tufted capuchins (Cebus apella) attribute value to foods and 
tools during voluntary exchanges with humans. Anim Cogn 7, 19–24 (2004).
17. Osvath, M. & Osvath, H. Chimpanzee (Pan troglodytes) and orangutan (Pongo abelii) forethought: selfcontrol and pre-experience in 
the face of future tool use. Anim Cogn 11, 661–674 (2008).
18. Auersperg, A. M. I., Szabo, B., von Bayern, A. M. P . & Kacelnik, A. Spontaneous innovation in tool manufacture and use in a Goffin’s 
cockatoo. Curr Bio 22(21), 903–904 (2012).
19. Auersperg, A. M. I. et al. Social transmission of tool use and tool manufacture in Goffin Cockatoos (Cacatua goffini). Proc R Soc B 
281, 20140972 (2014).
20. Bird, C. D. & Emery, N. J. Insightful problem solving and creative tool modification by nontool-using rooks. PNAS 106(25),  
10370–10375 (2009).
21. Weir, A. A. S., Chappell, J. & Kacelnik, A. Shaping of hooks in New Caledonian crows. Science 297, 981 (2002).
22. Forshaw, J. M. & Cooper, W . T. Parrots of the World 2nd edn (eds Forshaw, J. M. & Cooper, W . T.) 133–134 (T. F . H. Publications Inc., 1977).
23. Auersperg, A. M. I., Szabo, B. & Bugnyar, T. Object permanence in the Goffin’s cockatoo (Cacatua goffini). J Comp Psych. published 
online doi: 10.1037/a0033272 (2013).
24. Auersperg, A. M. I., Kacelnik, A. & von Bayern, A. M. P . Explorative learning and functional inferences on a five-step mechanical 
problem in juvenile Goffin’s cockatoos (Cacatua goffini). Plos ONE 8(7), e68979 (2013).
25. Rutz, C. et al. The ecological significance of tool use in New Caledonian crows Science 329, 1523–1526 (2010).
26. Auersperg, A. M. I. et al. Combinatory actions during object play in psittaciformes (Diopsittaca nobilis, Pionites melanocephala, 
Cacatua goffini) and corvids (Corvus corax, C. monedula, C. moneduloides). J Comp Psych 129(1), 62–71 (2015).
27. Halford, G. S., Wilson, W . H. & Phillips, S. Processing capacity defined by relational complexity: Implications for comparative, 
developmental and cognitive psychology. Behav Brain Sci 21, 803–865 (1998).
28. Rowe, C. & Healy, S. D. Measuring variation in cognition. Behav Ecol 00(00), 1–6 (2014).
29. Chappell, J. & Kacelnik, A. Selection of tool diameter by New Caledonian crows Corvus moneduloides. Anim Cogn 7, 121–127 (2004).
30. Taylor, A. H., Hunt, G. R., Holzhaider, J. C. & Gray, R. D. Spontaneous Metatool Use by New Caledonian Crows. Curr Bio  17, 
1504–1507 (2007).
31. Wimpenny, J. H., Weir, A. A. S., Clayton, L., Rutz, C. & Kacelnik, A. Cognitive Processes Associated with Sequential Tool Use in New 
Caledonian Crows. PLoS ONE 4(8), e6471 (2009).
Acknowledgements
We want to thank Jorg Massen, Stephan Reber and Bernhard Völkl for comments on previous versions of this 
manuscript. This work was supported by FWF Grants J 3404-B19 and P 29084 to Alice Auersperg, Y366-B17 to 
Thomas Bugnyar and by a uni:docs fellowship of the University of Vienna to Isabelle Laumer.

PDF PAGE 8
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
8
Scientific  RepoRts  | 6:28380 | DOI: 10.1038/srep28380
Author Contributions
I.B.L. and A.M.I.A. designed the study, I.B.L. performed the research and analyzed data. I.B.L., T.B. and A.M.I.A. 
wrote the paper. All authors gave final approval for publication.
Additional Information
Supplementary information accompanies this paper at http://www.nature.com/srep
Competing financial interests: The authors declare no competing financial interests.
How to cite this article: Laumer, I. B. et al. Flexible decision-making relative to reward quality and tool 
functionality in Goffin cockatoos (Cacatua goffiniana). Sci. Rep. 6, 28380; doi: 10.1038/srep28380 (2016).
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. The images 
or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, 
unless indicated otherwise in the credit line; if the material is not included under the Creative Commons license, 
users will need to obtain permission from the license holder to reproduce the material. To view a copy of this 
license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/