PDF PAGE 1
Review
Nut Consumption and Fertility: a Systematic Review and
Meta-Analysis
Barbara R. Cardoso 1,2,*, Izabella Fratezzi 1, Nicole J. Kellow 1, 3, **
1 Department of Nutrition, Dietetics and Food, Monash University, Victoria, Australia; 2 Victorian Heart Institute, Monash University, Clayton,
Victoria, Australia; 3 Centre for Innate Immunity and Infectious Diseases, Hudson Institute of Medical Research, Clayton, Victoria, Australia
ABSTRACT
The high concentration of omega-3 polyunsaturated fats, dietary ﬁbers, vitamins, minerals, and polyphenols found in nuts suggest their
regular consumption may be a simple strategy for improving reproductive health. This systematic review and meta-analysis aimed to present
up-to-date evidence regarding the association between nut intake and fertility outcomes in males and females. Ovid MEDLINE, Embase,
CINAHL, and Scopus were searched from inception to 30 June 2023. Eligible articles were interventional or observational studies in human
subjects of reproductive age (18 –49 y) that assessed the effects (or association) of dietary nut consumption (for a minimum of 3 mo) on
fertility-related outcomes. Random-effects meta-analyses were completed to produce a pooled effect estimate of nut consumption on sperm
total motility, vitality, morphology, and concentration in healthy males. Four studies involving 875 participants (646 males, 229 females)
were included in this review. Meta-analysis of 2 RCTs involving 223 healthy males indicated consumption of /C21 60g nuts/d increased sperm
motility, vitality, and morphology in comparison to controls but had no effect on sperm concentration. Nonrandomized studies reported no
association between dietary nut intake and conventional sperm parameters in males, embryo implantation, clinical pregnancy or live birth in
males and females undergoing ART. Our meta-analysis shows that including at least 2 servings of nuts daily as part of a Western-style diet in
healthy males improves sperm parameters, which are predictors of male fertility. Due to their nutritional pro ﬁle, nuts were found to have
potential to promote successful reproductive outcomes.
This trial was registered at PROSPERO (CRD42020204586).
Keywords: nuts, diet, fertility, male infertility, female infertility, sperm quality
Introduction
Infertility is a condition characterized by the failure to ach-
ieve a clinical pregnancy after 12 mo of regular and unprotected
sexual intercourse [ 1]. Infertility affects multiple areas of a
couple’s life and can have devastating long-term social, psy-
chological, and ﬁnancial consequences [ 2]. It is estimated that
between 8 and 12% of reproductive-aged couples in the world
are affected by infertility [ 1]. Furthermore, infertility in females
of reproductive age has been estimated to affect 1 in every
Statement of Signi ﬁcance
This ﬁrst-of-its-kind systematic review and meta-analysis shows that daily consumption of at least 2 servings of nuts (60 g) daily improves
semen quality in healthy males. We discuss the main potential mechanisms involved in such bene ﬁts and point directions for future research.
Abbreviations: ALA, alpha-linolenic acid; ART, assisted reproductive technologies; FFQ, food frequency questionnaire; FSH, follicle stimulating hormone; ICSI ,
intracytoplasmic sperm injection; IVF, in vitro fertilization; LH, luteinizing hormone; MedDiet, Mediterranean diet; PCOS, polycystic ovarian syndrome; RoB 2, Risk of
Bias 2 tool for randomized trials; ROBINS-I, Risk of Bias in Nonrandomized Studies –of Interventions; SHBG, sex hormone binding globulin; ROS, reactive oxygen
species; SMD, Standardized Mean Difference; SOD, superoxide dismutase; STIs, sexually transmitted infections.
* Corresponding author.
** Corresponding author. E-mail addresses: barbara.cardoso@monash.edu (B.R. Cardoso), nicole.kellow@monash.edu (N.J. Kellow).
journal homepage: https://advances.nutrition.org/
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.advnut.2023.100153
Received 14 July 2023; Received in revised form 18 September 2023; Accepted 13 November 2023; Available online 17 November 2023
2161-8313/© 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. on behalf of American Society for Nutrition. This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
Advances in Nutrition 15 (2024) 100153

PDF PAGE 2
7 couples in Western countries and 1 in every 4 couples in
developing countries, reaching rates as high as 30% [ 3]. Male
infertility rates are reported to be highest in Africa and Cen-
tral/Eastern Europe, whereas rates for North America, Australia,
and Central and Eastern Europe vary from 4.5 to 12% [ 4].
Common factors that negatively affect a couple ’s ability to
successfully conceive a child include advanced maternal and/
or paternal age, malnutrition, endocrine disorders such as
obesity or polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS), complications
associated with untreated sexually transmitted infections (STIs),
and sperm production abnormalities. However, in 10 to 15% of
cases, the etiology of infertility remains unknown [ 5]. Although
assisted reproductive technologies (ART) are a common treat-
ment option for subfertility, not all affected couples can afford it.
The average cost of a standard in vitro fertilization (IVF) cycle
was estimated at U$19,200 in the United States [ 6], although
this amount can signi ﬁcantly vary across countries [ 7]. Consid-
erable economic, racial, ethnic, geographic, and cultural dis-
parities in access to fertility treatments also exist [ 8]; thus,
research aiming at maximizing natural fertility is of utmost
importance.
Emerging scienti ﬁc efforts focus on identifying modi ﬁable
factors that affect fertility, such as diet and other health behav-
iors. The literature in this ﬁeld has greatly expanded over the last
decade, recognizing some dietary patterns associated with
higher reproductive potential. The most studied dietary pattern
regarding fertility is the Mediterranean diet (MedDiet), which is
characterized by the high intake of mono and polyunsaturated
fats from ﬁsh and olive oil, and high consumption of fruits,
vegetables, whole grains, legumes, and nuts, and moderate
alcohol consumption [ 9]. Observational prospective cohort
studies have demonstrated that adherence to this diet has been
associated with a larger number of embryos available, fertilized
oocytes, and embryo yield in infertile females undergoing IVF
treatment [10], as well as increased probability of pregnancy in
females undergoing IVF/intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI)
treatment [ 11–13]. In males, evidence from cross-sectional
studies shows that MedDiet consumption is associated with
increased sperm concentration, total sperm count, and total and
progressive motility [ 14, 15]. Further, Gaskins et al. [ 16]
designed the Pro-Fertility diet based on foods and nutrients
previously related to ART outcomes aiming to maximize fema-
les’s fertility. Despite some similarities with the MedDiet, the
Pro-Fertility diet emphasizes the importance of speci ﬁc nutrients
such as folic acid, B12, and vitamin D, necessary for optimal fetal
development, as well as the low exposure to pesticides by
prioritizing low-pesticide fruits and vegetables. In an observa-
tional study, they found that high adherence to this dietary
pattern was associated with higher probability of implantation,
clinical pregnancy, and live birth, whereas no associations were
observed for estradiol trigger levels, endometrial thickness, total
or mature oocyte yield, or number of embryos [ 16]. Nonetheless,
observational studies report con ﬂicting evidence regarding the
association between adherence to the Pro-Fertility diet and
markers of ovarian reserve [ 17, 18], demonstrating the
complexity of the modi ﬁable factors on fertility.
Although the studies that aim to establish a relationship be-
tween dietary patterns and fertility outcomes can provide
insightful information, they may also represent a challenge to
those who have very distinct dietary habits. Thus, identifying the
beneﬁts of particular foods can elucidate dietary strategies that
are easier to implement. Nuts can be a strong ally for fertility
management given their nutritional pro ﬁle, characterized by a
high ratio of omega-3: omega-6 fatty acids, low concentration of
saturated fats, and large concentration of proteins, ﬁbers, vita-
mins, minerals, and bioactive compounds with potential redox
action [19]. The beneﬁts of nut intake have been associated with
reduced risk of different chronic diseases such as diabetes
[20–22
], cognitive impairment [23], and cardiovascular diseases
[24, 25]. Given the importance of diet as a modi ﬁable factor to
reduce infertility, this systematic review and meta-analysis aims
to present up-to-date evidence regarding the role of nutrition in
fertility, focusing on nuts as a key component to improve
reproductive health. We further discuss the potential mecha-
nisms regulated by nuts that are involved in fertility.
Methods
Study identi ﬁcation
The aim of this review was to synthesize the outcomes of
published human studies investigating the effect of dietary nut
consumption on fertility. This review was conducted in accor-
dance with the PRISMA statement [ 26] and was prospectively
registered on a systematic literature review registration website
(PROSPERO, Registration No. CRD42020204586). Research
literature databases Ovid MEDLINE, Scopus, CINAHL, and
Embase were searched from database inception to 30 June 2023.
The PICOS framework used was Population: males and females
of reproductive age (for the purpose of this review, “reproductive
age” was de ﬁned as adults aged 18 –49 y); Intervention: Nut
consumption; Comparator: no or low nut consumption;
Outcome: biochemical fertility markers, clinical pregnancy or
live birth, Study design: all study types (cross-sectional,
case-control, cohort, and RCTs). Studies were included if pub-
lished in either English or Spanish and involved human partici-
pants. All databases were searched using the terms: Adult* AND
(Diet OR Nuts OR “Prunus Dulcis” OR Almond* OR Anacardium
OR Cashew* OR Corylus OR Hazelnut* OR Pistacia OR
Pistachio* OR Juglans OR Walnut* OR Carya OR Pecan* OR
Arachis OR Peanut* OR Pinus OR ‘Pine nut*’ OR Bertholletia OR
‘Brazil nut* ’) AND (Pregnancy OR ‘Live Birth ’ OR Fertility OR
Infertility OR Fecundity OR ‘Sperm quality ’ OR ‘Semen quality ’
OR ‘Sperm concentration ’ OR ‘Sperm motility ’ OR ‘Sperm DNA
fragmentation’ OR embryo* OR ‘embryo morphology ’ OR
oocyte*). The full search strategy is presented in Supplemental
Table 1 . Studies with a cross-sectional, case-control, cohort, or
clinical trial study design, which recruited human subjects of
reproductive age, assessed dietary nut consumption for a mini-
mum of 3 mo, and measured any fertility-related outcomes were
eligible for inclusion. Duration of nut consumption for a mini-
mum of 3 mo was chosen as a criterion for inclusion in this re-
view as it takes up to 76 d (2.5 mo) for sperm cell maturation
[27], and therefore nut consumption was required to be main-
tained during this timeframe. Excluded trials involved human
participants outside of reproductive age ( <18 y or >49 y), did
not quantify dietary nut intake, only quanti ﬁed dietary nut
intake when grouped together with other foods (e.g., seeds,
beans, soy products) or assessed nut consumption for less than 3
mo, were animal, ecological or in vitro studies, or measured
B.R. Cardoso et al. Advances in Nutrition 15 (2024) 100153
2

PDF PAGE 3
outcomes which were unrelated to fertility. Reference lists of
selected studies and reviews were manually searched to sup-
plement the electronic search.
Screening and eligibility
All resultant references were imported into a systematic re-
view screening and data extraction software program (Covidence
Systematic Review Software, Veritas Health Innovation), which
was used to screen studies and identify those meeting the pre-
speciﬁed inclusion criteria. The Covidence program automati-
cally identiﬁed and eliminated duplicate articles. During the ﬁrst
pass, article titles and abstracts were screened by 2 of the listed
authors (IF, NJK, BRC) independently to determine their suit-
ability for inclusion. Selected studies then underwent full-text
screening, which was also conducted by 2 of the listed authors
(IF, NJK, BRC) independently. Con ﬂicts were resolved by dis-
cussion until consensus was reached. On completion of
screening, the PRISMA Flowchart was automatically generated
by the Covidence program.
Risk of bias assessment and data extraction
Risk of bias in eligible studies was independently assessed by
2 separate authors (NJK and BRC) using either the Cochrane Risk
of Bias 2 tool for randomized trials (RoB 2) [ 28] or risk of Bias in
Nonrandomized Studies –of Interventions (ROBINS-I) tool [ 29].
The RoB 2 tool identi ﬁes potential sources of bias within RCTs
based on a set of 5 domains, including bias arising from the
randomization process, deviations from intended interventions,
incomplete outcome data, outcome measurement bias, and se-
lective reporting of results. Risk of bias for each RCT was
designated as either “low risk,”“ some concerns,” or “high risk.”
Studies that were assigned as “low risk ” for all 5 items were
considered to have an overall low risk of bias; studies assigned
“some concerns” for /C21 1 items (in the absence of any “high risk”
items) were considered to have some concerns regarding their
risk of bias, whereas studies allocated /C21 1 “high risk” items were
designated as having a high risk of bias overall. The ROBINS-I
tool identi ﬁes potential biases within nonrandomized studies
based on a set of 7 domains, including confounding, selection of
participants, classi ﬁcation of interventions, deviations from
intended interventions, incomplete outcome data, outcome
measurement bias, and selective reporting of results. Risk of bias
for each study was classi ﬁed as either “no information, ”“ low
risk,”“ moderate risk, ”“ serious risk, ” or “critical risk. ” Studies
assigned “moderate risk ” for /C21 1 items (in the absence of any
“serious risk” or “critical risk” items) were considered to have an
overall moderate risk of bias, whereas studies allocated /C21 1
“serious risk ” items were designated as having a serious risk of
bias overall. Inconsistencies between the authors' risk of bias
assessments at the study level were resolved through active
discussion until consensus was reached.
Upon completion of screening and risk of bias assessments, data
were independently extracted from each article by all authors
using a data collection table. Data collected included ﬁrst author,
year of publication, country in which the trial was conducted,
mean age of participants (y), gender of participants (female or
male), mean body mass index (BMI) of participants (kg/m
2), type
of nuts consumed, quantity of nuts consumed, methodology used
to assess nut intake, length of the intervention/study, rate of
follow-up and the fertility outcomes measured.
Statistical analysis
A meta-analysis was carried out for the outcomes available in
the RCTs: sperm total motility, sperm morphology, sperm vitality,
and sperm concentration. Semen quality outcomes were sub-
jected to a random-effects model meta-analyses using Review
Manager (RevMan) (Version 5.1. Copenhagen: The Nordic
Cochrane Centre, The Cochrane Collaboration, 2014). Using
change data for control and intervention groups, the standardized
mean difference (SMD) was determined for each outcome with
95% con ﬁdence intervals (CIs). SMD values of 0.2, 0.5, and 0.8
were considered to represent small, moderate, and large effect
sizes, respectively [ 30]. Where the manuscript provided median
and IQR values, the mean and standard deviation were estimated
using the method of McGrath (2020) [ 31]. Results were com-
bined for each outcome, and data were tested for interstudy
heterogeneity using the Cochrane Q statistic and quanti ﬁed by
the I
2 statistic with P < 0.10. An I 2 > 50% was considered sub-
stantial heterogeneity.
Results
Study selection
The initial search resulted in 11,691 articles (after removal of
duplicates), of which 11,634 were excluded upon initial
screening for not meeting inclusion criteria. The remaining 57
papers were comprehensively assessed for eligibility, with 53
being excluded for the following reasons: not human trials, not
available in English or Spanish, did not include a target outcome,
not a relevant intervention, and insuf ﬁcient detail of dietary
intervention. All studies screened speci ﬁed a dietary intake
assessment timeframe, and no studies were found that collected
dietary intake information for a duration of < 3 mo. During the
title, abstract, and full-text screening phases, no con ﬂicts be-
tween reviewers occurred (interrater agreement was 100%).
Four studies involving 875 (646 males, 229 females) participants
fulﬁlled the inclusion criteria and were included in the system-
atic review, and 2 of the 4 studies were included in the meta-
analysis ( Figure 1 ).
Study characteristics
Two of the studies included in this review were RCTs with
parallel dietary interventio ns, collectively involving 223
healthy males. Both studies targeted males within a similar age
range (overall 18 –35 y) who reported consuming a typical
Western-style diet. Robbins et al. [ 32]p r o v i d e d7 5go f
whole-shelled English walnuts/ d for 12 wk as the intervention,
whereas Salas-Huetos et al. [ 33]p r o v i d e d6 0gn u t s( 3 0g
walnuts, 15 g almonds, 15 g hazelnuts) to their experimental
group for a period of 14 wk. In both studies, the control group
continued consuming a regular diet without nuts. The primary
outcomes for both studies incl uded conventional semen pa-
rameters (concentration, vitality, motility, and morphology).
Robbins et al. [ 32] further assessed sperm aneuploidy as part of
the primary outcomes, and the secondary outcomes included
sperm fatty acid concentratio ns and blood hormones (total
testosterone, estradiol, folli cle stimulating hormone [FSH],
luteinizing hormone [LH], and sex hormone binding globulin
[SHBG]). The study by Salas-Huetos et al. [ 33]f u r t h e ri n c l u d e d
s p e r mc o n c e n t r a t i o na n dp Ha sp r i m a r yo u t c o m e sa n da s s e s s e d
B.R. Cardoso et al. Advances in Nutrition 15 (2024) 100153
3

PDF PAGE 4
sperm reactive oxygen species (ROS) production, DNA frag-
mentation, methylation, chromo some stability, and microRNA
expression as secondary outcomes. A cohort study included in
this review aimed to examine the association between dietary
nut intake and fertility outcomes in 229 couples undergoing
ARTs [ 34]. Dietary intake of peanuts, walnuts, and other nuts
were quanti ﬁed individually and combined to estimate “total
nut intake ” using a validated 131-item food frequency ques-
t i o n n a i r e( F F Q ) .T h ep r i m a r yo u t c o m e sa s s e s s e dw e r et h ea s -
sociations between both maternal and paternal dietary nut
intake and probability of embryo implantation, clinical preg-
nancy, and live birth. Secondary outcomes included associa-
tions between maternal nut intake and probability of pregnancy
loss and the relationship between male nut consumption and
conventional markers of semen quality. A case-control study
comparing the dietary intakes of 40 males with subfertility
(oligoasthenoteratozoospermia ) a n d4 0m a l e sw i t hn o r m o -
zoospermia also met the criteria for inclusion in this review
[35]. The authors estimated dietary nut consumption using
interviews and an FFQ (validation status unknown). The char-
acteristics of the 4 studies incl u d e di nt h ep r e s e n ts y s t e m a t i c
review are shown in Table 1 .
Risk of Bias
Both RCTs included in this review were determined to have
“some concerns ” regarding their risk of bias according to the
Cochrane RoB 2 tool ( Figure 2 A). The main sources of bias
included failure to disclose whether outcome assessors or stat-
isticians were blinded [ 33] and failure to prepublish a statistical
analysis plan in a clinical trials registry [ 32]. Of the 2 non-
randomized studies, one was determined to have a moderate risk
of bias [ 34], and the other had a serious risk of bias [ 35] ac-
cording to the ROBINS-I tool ( Figure 2 B). The main sources of
bias in these studies included failure to adjust for major con-
founders [35] and failure to disclose whether outcome assessors
or statisticians were blinded [ 34, 35].
Outcomes
Salas-Huetos et al. [ 34] found no association between dietary
intake of total nuts, peanuts, walnuts, or other nuts and proba-
bility of implantation, clinical pregnancy, or live birth in 229
females or their male partners following ART. There was also no
association between maternal nut intake and pregnancy loss. Nut
consumption was rather low in this cohort, with the females in
the highest quartile of nut intake only consuming a median of 0.9
FIGURE 1. PRISMA ﬂowchart detailing progression of studies through the review process. * Hand searching of the reference lists of the included
studies was undertaken, but no additional studies were identi ﬁed.
B.R. Cardoso et al. Advances in Nutrition 15 (2024) 100153
4

PDF PAGE 5
TABLE 1
Nut consumption and fertility outcomes in males and females of reproductive age
First author
(year of
publication),
country of
origin
Trial
methodology,
length of
intervention
Number of participants,
gender, mean age (y),
mean participant
BMI (kg/m
2)
Type & quantity of
nuts consumed
Methods used to
assess dietary
intake and
monitor nut intake
Study
completion
rate or %
follow-up
Outcomes
measured
Effect of nut
consumption
versus
comparator on
fertility
outcomes
Robbins
(2012),
USA [ 32]
Parallel RCT,
single-blinded,
12 wk
117 healthy males
consuming a Western-style
diet, mean age: 25y
(range: 21 –35y), mean
BMI: 25 kg/m
2
75g walnuts/d
(intervention)
versus no nuts
Diet history
questionnaire
and 3-d food record,
random telephone
24-hr recalls twice
monthly to assess nut
intake compliance
(outcome not stated)
n ¼ 117 randomized,
n ¼ 117 provided
baseline data,
n ¼ 112 completed
the study (96%)
Sperm:
- concentration
- total motility
- morphology
- vitality
- aneuploidy
Sperm & Serum:
- ALA
- DHA
- omega-6
- omega-3
Sex Hormones:
- FSH
- Testosterone
Sperm:
↔ concentration
↑total motility
↑morphology
↑vitality
↔ aneuploidy
Serum:
↑ALA
↔ DHA
↑omega-6
↑omega-3
Sex Hormones:
↑FSH
↔ Testosterone
Salas-Huetos
(2018),
Spain [ 33]
Parallel RCT,
blinding not
stated, 14 wk
119 healthy males
consuming a Western-style
diet, mean age: 24.5y
(range: 18 –35y), mean
BMI: 24 kg/m
2
60g mixed nuts/d
(intervention)
versus no nuts
3-d food record,
return of empty
nut sachets to
assess nut intake
compliance ( >95%)
n ¼ 119 randomized,
n ¼ 106 provided
baseline data,
n ¼ 98 completed
the study (82%)
Sperm:
- count
- concentration
- total motility
- morphology
- vitality
- aneuploidy
- DNA fragmentation
- DNA methylation
- microRNA expression
- ROS
Sperm:
↑count
↔ concentration
↑total motility
↑morphology
↑vitality
↔ aneuploidy
↓DNA fragmentation
↔ DNA methylation
↓microRNA expression
↔ ROS
Salas-Huetos
(2022),
USA [ 34]
Prospective
cohort,
2007–2020
229 females and their male
partners receiving ART,
median age: 35y (IQR 32 –38)
(females) and 36y (IQR
33.6–39.3) (males), median
BMI: 23 kg/m
2 (IQR 21 –25.7)
(females) and 27 kg/m 2
(IQR 24.3 –28.9) (males).
343 males contributed to
semen analysis data
Median (IQR) total
nut intake: 0.4
(0.2, 0.7) serves/d
(females). (0.4 serves
nuts ¼ approx. 12g)
Validated
131-item FFQ
N/A Primary outcomes:
- embryo implantation
- clinical pregnancy
- live birth
Secondary outcomes:
- total pregnancy loss
(females)
- semen volume,
sperm count, sperm
concentration, sperm
total and progressive
motility, sperm
morphology (males)
Association between
intake of total nuts,
peanuts, walnuts and
other nuts (males and
females) and primary
outcomes:
↔ embryo implantation
↔ clinical pregnancy
↔ live birth
Association between
intake of total nuts,
peanuts, walnuts and
other nuts (females)
and secondary outcomes:
↔ total pregnancy loss
Association between
intake of total nuts,
peanuts, walnuts and
other nuts (males) and
(continued on next page )
B.R. Cardoso et al. Advances in Nutrition 15 (2024) 100153
5

PDF PAGE 6
TABLE 1 (continued )
First author
(year of
publication),
country of
origin
Trial
methodology,
length of
intervention
Number of participants,
gender, mean age (y),
mean participant
BMI (kg/m
2)
Type & quantity of
nuts consumed
Methods used to
assess dietary
intake and
monitor nut intake
Study
completion
rate or %
follow-up
Outcomes
measured
Effect of nut
consumption
versus
comparator on
fertility
outcomes
secondary outcomes:
↔ semen volume,
sperm count, sperm
concentration, sperm
total and progressive
motility, sperm
morphology
Yorusun (2020),
Turkey [ 35]
Case-control 40 males with subfertility
(low semen volume, sperm
concentration, sperm count,
sperm motility and sperm
progressive motility according
to WHO criteria) and 40 males
with normozoospermia, mean
age: 34.7 /C6 5.6y (subfertile
group) and 34.7 /C6 6.0y
(normozoospermic group)
(P > 0.05), mean BMI:
28.2 /C6 4.0 kg/m
2 (subfertile
group) and 26.6 /C6 3.0 kg/m 2
(normozoospermic group)
(P< 0.05)
Median (IQR) nut
intake: 8 (26) g/d
(subfertile group),
12 (34.8) g/d
(normozoospermic
group) ( P ¼ 0.99)
Interview and FFQ
(type and validation
of FFQ not stated)
N/A Diet:
- Dietary nut intake/d
Sperm:
- sperm concentration
- sperm count
- sperm motility
- sperm
progressive motility
- sperm rapid motility
Diet:
↔ dietary nut
intake/d between
groups
Sperm:
Signiﬁcant positive
correlation between
nut intake/d and
sperm motility
(rho¼0.234, P< 0.05)
and sperm progressive
motility (rho ¼ 0.269,
P< 0.05) (total group)
Abbreviations: ART: assisted reproductive technology; ALA: alpha-linolenic acid; BMI: body mass index; FFQ: food frequency questionnaire; FSH: f ollicle stimulating hormone; IQR: interquartile
range; RCT: randomized controlled trial; ROS: reactive oxygen species; WHO: World Health Organization; ↓: signi ﬁcantly lower than in the comparison control group after intervention; ↑:
signiﬁcantly higher than in the comparison control group after intervention; ↔ : no signi ﬁcant difference between the nut-supplemented and control groups after intervention.
B.R. Cardoso et al. Advances in Nutrition 15 (2024) 100153
6

PDF PAGE 7
servings of total nuts/day. Similarly, the authors found no as-
sociation between dietary nut intake and conventional semen
parameters in males, although the association between walnut
intake and total sperm count approached signi ﬁcance (P trend ¼
0.05). Interestingly, the same study found signi ﬁcant associa-
tions between DHA and EPA consumption and increased prob-
ability of live birth in females. Dietary ALA intake in males was
also positively associated with sperm count and concentration. In
their case-control study, Yorusun and colleagues [ 35] reported
that although males with subfertility had a signi ﬁcantly higher
BMI and consumed more sugar-sweetened beverages, alcohol,
and meals outside of home than their fertile counterparts, there
was no signi ﬁcant difference in nut intake between groups ( P ¼
0.992). However, dietary nut intake was very low overall, with a
median nut consumption of 8 and 12 grams per day in the sub-
fertile and normozoospermic groups, respectively, the equivalent
of /C20 0.4 servings of nuts per day. The authors found a small but
signiﬁcant positive correlation between nut intake and sperm
motility and progressive motility, but these results are ques-
tionable, considering that the statistical analysis was not
adjusted for key confounders.
Given the homogeneous study populations, interventions,
outcomes, and risk of bias observed between the 2 RCTs included
in this review, we conducted a meta-analysis considering con-
ventional semen parameters. Both the interventions with wal-
nuts (75 g/d) [ 32] and mixed nuts (60 g/d) [ 33] resulted in
signiﬁcant increases in semen total motility (SMD in % pro-
gressive plus nonprogressive: 0.51; 95% CI: 0.24, 0.78; P <
0.001) (Figure 3A), morphology (SMD in % normal forms: 0.54;
95% CI: 0.24, 0.83; P < 0.001) (Figure 3B) and vitality (SMD as
%: 0.61; 95% CI: 0.34, 0.88; P < 0.001) ( Figure 3 C) in com-
parison to control group, whereas no differences were observed
for sperm concentration (SMD as /C2 10
6/ml): 0.26; 95% CI: -0.00,
0.52; P ¼ 0.05) ( Figure 3 D). Salas-Huetos et al. [ 33] further re-
ported that the addition of mixed nuts to the usual diet for 14 wk
signiﬁcantly increased total sperm count (median change: 4.45 /C2
10
6/ml, P ¼ 0.002 for treatment effect), reduced sperm DNA
fragmentation ( P < 0.001 for treatment effect) and the expres-
sion of hsa-miR-34b-3p ( P ¼ 0.036 for treatment effect). In that
study, no signi ﬁcant effect of the intervention was observed for
sperm volume, pH, ROS production, global DNA methylation,
and chromosome stability. Robbins et al. [ 32] also reported that
the consumption of 75 g of walnuts daily reduced aneuploidy
within the treatment group after 12 wk ( P ¼ 0.003), even though
there was no difference between study groups at the end of the
intervention. Further, the consumption of walnuts did not have
signiﬁcant effect on blood hormone concentrations. As the 2
observational studies had different study designs (longitudinal
cohort and case-control), it was not appropriate to combine their
results in a meta-analysis.
Discussion
This systematic literature review and meta-analysis were
designed to provide insight into research exploring the effects of
nuts as a nutritional strategy to improve reproductive health.
FIGURE 2. Risk of bias results for included studies using the A) Cochrane Risk of Bias 2 (RoB 2) tool and B) Risk of Bias in Nonrandomized
Studies–of Interventions (ROBINS-I) tool (traf ﬁc light plot).
B.R. Cardoso et al. Advances in Nutrition 15 (2024) 100153
7

PDF PAGE 8
Despite the ﬂexible inclusion criteria, which encompassed
different study designs, only 4 papers were identi ﬁed and
included in our review. Two randomized studies targeting
healthy males reported that the consumption of at least 2 serves
of nuts per day as part of a Western-style diet improves semen
parameters such as sperm vitality, motility, and morphology. In
contrast, 2 nonrandomized studies involving participants with
varied fertility status found no convincing evidence for the as-
sociation between dietary nut consumption of /C20 1 serving per
day and markers of sperm quality (males) or rates of embryo
implantation, clinical pregnancy, or live birth following ART
(females and males). Given the limited ﬁndings in the literature,
we here discuss possible mechanisms that explain the bene ﬁts of
nuts to fertility ( Figure 4 ).
Western-style diet is considered a type of unhealthy diet given
the high presence of ultra-processed foods containing high con-
centrations of saturated fatty acids, salt, and re ﬁned and simple
carbohydrates, along with low intake of fresh produce [ 36].
This diet is strongly associated with chronic diseases such as
obesity and type 2 diabetes [ 37]. Further, evidence compiled in
literature reviews demonstrates that Western diets have been
associated with an overall decline in male reproduction health
[38]; more speci ﬁcally, diets rich in typical Western-diet foods
such as processed meat, full-fat dairy products, sweets, and
sugar-sweetened beverages have been linked to worse semen
quality [39]. In females, Western diets were associated with high
rates of miscarriages [ 40] and infertility due to hormonal alter-
ations that contribute to ovulation impairment [ 36]. Despite the
close association between the consumption of Western-style diets
and negative health outcomes, global dietary trends clearly show
a rise in the consumption of saturated fat, sweeteners, and reﬁned
grains, indicating a steady increase in the consumption of
ultra-processed foods across the globe [ 38]. Therefore, dietary
strategies that can effectively offset the negative impact of
ultra-processed foods are of major importance.
Tree nuts have an optimal fatty acid pro ﬁle due to a high con-
centration of MUFA and polyunsaturated fats and a low concen-
tration of saturated fats. High concentration of MUFA in blood,
which is highly present in hazelnuts, peanuts, and almonds, was
associated with increased fecundability in normal-weight females
FIGURE 3. Effect of nut consumption on A) sperm total motility (% progressive plus nonprogressive); B) sperm morphology (% normal forms); C)
sperm vitality (%); and D) sperm concentration (x 106/mL) in healthy males. Standardized mean difference (95% CI) shown for individual and
pooled trials.
B.R. Cardoso et al. Advances in Nutrition 15 (2024) 100153
8

PDF PAGE 9
with prior pregnancy loss in a prospective cohort [41]. Further, an
observational study of over 18,000 females without fertility
problems demonstrated that swapping 2% of energy intake from
trans fatty acids with MUFA was associated with less than half of
risk of ovulatory infertility [ 42]. If we consider a 2000 kcal stan-
dard diet, which would meet the nutritional needs of most adults,
this swap represents the inclusion of ~37g of walnuts (one of the
least tree nuts concentrated in MUFA) or 7.5g of macadamia (one
of the most concentrated sources of MUFA among tree nuts), which
would supply around 4.5 g/MUFA (40 kcal). Even though it re-
mains to be explored whether nut consumption can increase
MUFA concentration signi ﬁcantly as a potential mechanism, we
hypothesize that this can be a mechanism of action of nuts for
positive fertility outcomes. Walnuts, in particular, are known to
have a high concentration of alpha-linolenic acid (ALA), a
plant-based omega-3 fatty acid [ 43–46]. Higher omega-3 fatty
acid concentration in the spermatozoa membrane is associated
with better motility and membrane ﬂuidity, characteristics
required for effective fertilization [ 47–50]. Evidence from ran-
domized clinical trials has demonstrated that the lipid composition
of the sperm membrane is highly inﬂuenced by dietary intake [49,
51, 52]. As such, supplementation with DHA alone or in
conjunction with EPA at doses that ranged from 1 to 2 g/d to males
with idiopathic oligoasthenoteratozoospermia [ 49] or other
infertility conditions [51] resulted in a signiﬁcant improvement in
semen parameters, such as sperm total count, concentration, and
motility. Additionally, reduced spermatozoa with DNA damage
was seen in the trial conducted by Martínez-Soto et al. [51], which
used a dose of 1.5g/d. The consumption of omega-3 fatty acids is
known to increase the anti-inﬂammatory response, as opposed to
omega-6 fatty acids. As such, nut intake is negatively associated
with inﬂammatory markers [53, 54]. Further, higher consumption
of omega-3 was demonstrated to be associated with improved
fecundability, possibly via reduction of proin ﬂammatory cyto-
kines and adhesion molecules [ 41, 55]. Studies also indicate a
positive regulation of the antioxidant response by omega-3 fatty
acids, which is particularly important for spermatozoa given they
are highly susceptible to peroxidative damage [ 49]. Randomized
clinical trials demonstrated that supplementation with omega-3 to
males with infertility increased their antioxidant capacity as
measured by the activity of superoxide dismutase (SOD) and
catalase [ 49], as well as the seminal antioxidant capacity [ 51].
Although more research is required to elucidate the mechanisms
involved, animal studies have shown that part of this
antioxidant-related effect of omega-3 fatty acids is related to their
capacity to facilitate the translocation and activation of speci ﬁc
FIGURE 4. Hypothesis diagram for the role of nuts in fertility: Nuts are highly concentrated in ALA and MUFAs, which positively regulate the fatty
acid concentrations in the follicular ﬂuid (within the follicle) and sperm membrane and enhance the anti-in ﬂammatory pathway, which increases
the antioxidant capacity. Selenium, zinc, vitamin E and polyphenols present in nuts also enhance the antioxidant capacity. Higher concentration of
antioxidants in the follicular ﬂuid correlates with production of high-quality oocytes, which ultimately contributes to successful embryo devel-
opment. During spermatogenesis, the developing sperm cells are highly sensitive to oxidative stress in seminal ﬂuid; thus, the higher concentration
of antioxidants reduces sperm DNA fragmentation. The high concentration of proteins and ﬁbers in nuts results in bene ﬁcial gut microbiota
remodeling, enhancement of satiety signaling, and improved glucose tolerance, which are all associated with a decrease in weight gain despite the
high energy concentration seen in nuts. The hard texture presented by nuts also contributes to satiety signaling. Increased insulin sensitivity
caused by nuts is associated with higher quality oocytes and a regulation of ovulation frequency (in opposition to reduction of ovulation frequency
observed in females with insulin resistance). Created with Biorender.com.
B.R. Cardoso et al. Advances in Nutrition 15 (2024) 100153
9

PDF PAGE 10
antioxidant response elements such as the Nrf2 [56, 57]. Research
is more limited regarding the investigation of the role of omega-3
in female fertility, although it has also been suggested the exis-
tence of an association between fatty acids composition of follic-
ular ﬂuid and fertility capacity, as this is an important
microenvironment for the development of oocytes [58]. In a study
involving 100 females undergoing ART, analysis of the fatty acid
composition of follicular ﬂuid revealed that the amount of satu-
rated and even polyunsaturated fatty acids was inversely associ-
ated with the number of mature oocytes. However, the amount of
ALA was associated with an improvement in maturity of oocytes,
which leads these oocytes to have a higher efﬁciency, size, and cell
membrane integrity due to membrane ﬂuidity [58].
Nuts are also known for their high content of compounds with
antioxidant proﬁle, such as polyphenols and vitamin E [ 59, 60].
Even though important variations in the concentration and types
of bioactive compounds are observed across the different types of
nuts, they overall offer a signi ﬁcant amount of these compounds.
For instance, it is estimated that the consumption of 30 g/d of
almonds and hazelnuts, which is aligned with current recom-
mendations [61], provides up to 49% of the dietary recommen-
dations for vitamin E [ 62]. Oxidative stress plays a fundamental
role in the occurrence of infertility, as ROS affect many different
physiological functions in the male and female reproductive tract
[63, 64]. Oxidative stress leads to membrane lipid damage and
inhibition of protein synthesis and ATP depletion, which impairs
oocyte maturation, as well as decreases ovarian steroidogenesis,
ovulation, implantation, blastocyst formation, luteolysis, and
luteal maintenance during pregnancy. In males, oxidative stress is
associated with lipid peroxidation of the sperm cell membrane,
sperm DNA damage, and apoptosis [ 65, 66]. A frequent conse-
quence of excessive ROS is sperm DNA fragmentation, which is
correlated with abnormal sperm morphology and motility and
impairs blastulation, implantation, and early embryo develop-
ment [ 67]. In couples undergoing ART, sperm DNA fragmenta-
tion is associated with reduced likelihood of pregnancy and
increased risk of miscarriage [ 68]. Even though research is
inconsistent in demonstrating the bene ﬁts of antioxidant sup-
plementation to improve fertility outcomes, mostly due to het-
erogeneous studies [ 69, 70], we hypothesize that one of the
mechanisms driven by the consumption of nuts on fertility is
through the improvement of the antioxidant system.
The different types of nuts also provide signi ﬁcant amounts of
minerals. Of particular interest for fertility, Brazil nuts are the
richest food source of selenium, necessary for fertilization and
embryo development, as well as protection of sperm against
oxidative stress. In that regard, selenium de ﬁciency, which af-
fects 1 in 7 people around the globe [ 71], is associated with
idiopathic infertility, higher rates of miscarriage, preterm birth,
decreased sperm motility, and fertilization capacity [72]. Several
trials with selenium supplementation showed positive effects on
sperm quality parameters; however, the ﬁndings are not
consistent across the literature [ 73]. This is probably because
selenium supplementation does not seem bene ﬁcial to
selenium-replete populations, and thus, the inclusion of Brazil
nuts in the diet would have higher potential to enhance fertility
capacity among those with selenium de ﬁciency. Zinc, also pre-
sent in important concentrations in several types of nuts such as
cashews, almonds, and pine nuts, plays a critical role in male
fertility, as it is required for sperm maturation, motility,
capacitation, and acrosomal exocytosis [ 74]. In females, zinc is
essential for processes that regulate follicle development, oocyte
maturation, and fertilization, highlighting the importance of this
mineral in all the steps involved in normal fertility [ 75].
Low glycemic index diets improve several features of PCOS,
such as hormonal pro ﬁle, insulin resistance, blood lipids, and
fertility, as reported by a meta-analysis of clinical trials [ 76)].
Insulin resistance seems to also be linked to male infertility, as
evidenced by lower semen volumes and higher sperm DNA
fragmentation and mitochondrial DNA damage rates in males
with diabetes in comparison to controls [ 77]. Given that nuts are
considered to have a low glycemic index due to their high con-
centration of proteins, ﬁbers, and fatty acids, we can contemplate
that regulation of blood glucose response is one of the mecha-
nisms involved in the effects of nuts on fertility. Further, poly-
phenols present in nuts seem to inhibit enzymes required for
carbohydrate digestion, such as alpha-glucosidase, which is re-
ﬂected in lower postprandial blood glucose responses [ 78]. Also,
there is suggestive evidence indicating that nuts have a prebiotic
effect [ 79], which means that they can selectively stimulate the
growth of bene ﬁcial bacterial species in the gut. By remodeling
the gut microbiome, nuts as prebiotics can decrease in ﬂamma-
tory markers and improve blood glucose response [ 80]. A
meta-analysis reported that treatment with probiotics or syn-
biotics, which positively shift the gut microbiome, is effective in
decreasing markers of insulin resistance in females with PCOS
[81]. Thus, the inclusion of nuts as part of a low glycemic index
diet can be used as a helpful strategy to beneﬁt particularly males
and females with insulin resistance, and type 1 or type 2 diabetes
who are trying to conceive.
Obesity is a major risk factor for infertility. Males with over-
weight/obesity present with worse sperm quantity/quality [ 82],
obese females have higher risk of PCOS and disrupted hormonal
proﬁle with lower levels of LH and gonadotropin hormone-r-
eleasing hormone, which negatively re ﬂect on fertility. Further,
obesity is associated with a reduction in the success of fertility
treatments [ 83]. Despite their high energy density, nuts do not
seem to be associated with overweight or obesity, as reported by a
meta-analysis of 6 prospective cohort studies and 86 randomized
clinical trials [84]. Paradoxically, higher consumption of nuts was
signiﬁcantly associated with a decrease in body weight and body
fat, indicating a protective effect against adiposity [84]. The main
explanations rely on the fact that nuts promote satiety due to their
high concentration of ﬁber and proteins, as well as their physical
structure, which requires effective mastication that triggers sati-
ating signaling mechanisms and reduces bioavailability of mac-
ronutrients and, hence, energy. Such effects seem to be more
important when nuts are consumed as a snack instead of being
combined with other foods in a meal [ 85]. Further, their high
concentration of unsaturated fatty acids is hypothesized to
contribute to higher thermogenesis [ 86]; however, evidence is
inconsistent in demonstrating that energy expenditure increases
due to nut consumption [ 85].
This systematic review and meta-analysis were limited to only 4
studies available in the literature, which ﬂags the necessity for
other studies to better identify the potential beneﬁts of introducing
nuts into the diet to improve fertility outcomes. Although the 2
RCTs reported positive effects of /C21 2 servings of nuts/d in sperm
parameters of healthy males, the 2 observational studies did not
ﬁnd signiﬁcant associations between nut consumption and fertility
B.R. Cardoso et al. Advances in Nutrition 15 (2024) 100153
10

PDF PAGE 11
health. Signiﬁcant differences between the RCTs and the obser-
vational studies should be highlighted in order to understand these
discrepancies. First, whereas the RCTs provided at least 2 servings
of nuts/d, the observational studies were conducted in populations
with a rather low nut consumption (one reported an average intake
of 0.9 servings of total nuts/d [ 34] and the other one reported a
median consumption between 8 and 12 g/d) [ 35]. Second, it is
important to note the differences in the study populations included
in the RCTs versus the observational studies: whereas the RCTs
recruited healthy males, the prospective study by Salas-Huetos
[34] recruited males and females with fertility issues. Further,
even though the control males in the study by Yorusun [ 35] had
normal sperm quality, they may have had other sperm abnor-
malities that were not measured in the study (for example, sperm
DNA fragmentation). Also, whereas the prospective study design
and the statistical analysis that adjusted for diet quality in the
study conducted by Salas-Huetos [ 34] minimizes reverse causal-
ity, the study conducted by Yorusun [ 35] did not consider any
dietary or behavioral factors in the data analysis, even though it is
known that semen quality may be affected by other aspects such as
diet quality, BMI and smoking status. Factors affecting risk of bias
in the included studies must also be considered when interpreting
the results of this review. Three of the 4 studies did not disclose
whether outcome assessors or statisticians were blinded, poten-
tially introducing a source of observer or detection bias. However,
this type of bias was unlikely in the included studies as laboratory
staff assessing sperm quality were unlikely to be aware of partic-
ipant dietary intakes. Failure to adjust for important covariates
such as participant age and BMI during statistical analysis may
have introduced confounding bias into one study [35] which was
determined to have a serious risk of bias, so results should be
interpreted with caution. All 4 studies assessed semen parameters
which, despite being a predictor of male fertility, do not neces-
sarily re ﬂect patient-important fertility outcomes such as preg-
nancy and live birth. Further, the 2 randomized studies t provided
participants with /C21 2 servings of nuts per day both involved
healthy males, which limits the extrapolation of the ﬁndings to
those who experience subfertility or infertility and are, therefore,
the most interested in the effects of dietary strategies for fertility
health. Additionally, given that infertility due to female factors is
impactful and can range from 30 to 80% [ 4], more studies tar-
geting females are necessary to elucidate the effects of nuts on
reproductive success.
Conclusions
Due to their nutritional pro ﬁle, nuts seem to have the po-
tential to promote successful reproductive outcomes. Our meta-
analysis shows that including /C21 2 servings of nuts daily as part
of a Western-style diet in healthy males improves sperm pa-
rameters, which are predictors of male fertility. Nonetheless, the
number of high-quality RCTs involving nut intake as a strategy
for infertility treatment is scarce and limited to males, even
though females ’s infertility problems affect a signi ﬁcant pro-
portion of couples ’ ability to conceive. Therefore, given that
infertility is considered a major health subject and now more
than ever people seek more natural and affordable alternatives to
deal with it, we advocate for future studies that target different
populations to include females and males who are having
difﬁculties conceiving and have pregnancy as primary outcome.
Given the differences in the nutritional composition of the
different types of nuts, future studies should also consider
combining different nuts to investigate potential synergistic ef-
fects regarding the positive effects on fertility outcomes.
Author contributions
The authors’ contributions were as follows —BRC: conceived
the review, screened titles and abstracts, reviewed the full text of
articles identiﬁed by the literature search, performed risk of bias
assessment, wrote the ﬁrst and ﬁnal draft of the manuscript,
checked the data extraction and edited the ﬁnal draft of the
manuscript. IF: screened titles and abstracts, reviewed the full
text of articles identi ﬁed by the literature search, read and
approved the ﬁnal manuscript. NJK: conceived the review, per-
formed the systematic search, screened titles and abstracts,
reviewed the full text of articles identi ﬁed by the literature
search, performed the data extraction, conducted the meta-
analysis, performed risk of bias assessment, contributed to
writing the ﬁrst draft and edited the ﬁnal draft of the manuscript.
All authors read and approved the ﬁnal version of the manuscript.
Conﬂicts of interest
The authors declare no con ﬂict of interest.
Funding
NJK is supported by a National Health and Medical
Research Council (NHMRC) Early Career Research Fellowship
(APP1164771). The other authors received no speci ﬁc funding
for this work.
Data availability
Corresponding authors will provide data and other materials
used in this review upon reasonable request.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.advnut.2023.100153.
References
[1] F. Szkodziak, J. Krzy _zanowski, P. Szkodziak, Psychological aspects of
infertility. A systematic review, J. Int. Med. Res. 48 (6) (2020)
300060520932403.
[2] P. Fatima, D. Rahman, H.B. Hossain, H.N. Hossain, C.R. Mughi,
Psychosocial consequences of infertility on infertile women,
Mymensingh Med. J. 24 (4) (2015) 704 –709.
[3] M.N. Mascarenhas, S.R. Flaxman, T. Boerma, S. Vanderpoel,
G.A. Stevens, National, regional, and global trends in infertility
prevalence since 1990: a systematic analysis of 277 health surveys, PLoS
Med 9 (12) (2012) e1001356 .
[4] A. Agarwal, A. Mulgund, A. Hamada, M.R. Chyatte, A unique view on
male infertility around the globe, Reprod. Biol. Endocrinol. 13 (2015)
37.
[5] S.R. Tamrakar, R. Bastakoti, Determinants of infertility in couples,
J. Nepal Health Res. Counc. 17 (1) (2019) 85 –89.
[6] Ethics Committee of the American Society for Reproductive Medicine,
Disparities in access to effective treatment for infertility in the United
States: an ethics committee opinion, Fertil, Steril 104 (5) (2015)
1104–1110.
[7] G.M. Chambers, E.A. Sullivan, O. Ishihara, M.G. Chapman,
G.D. Adamson, The economic impact of assisted reproductive
B.R. Cardoso et al. Advances in Nutrition 15 (2024) 100153
11

PDF PAGE 12
technology: a review of selected developed countries, Fertil Steril 91 (6)
(2009) 2281 –2294.
[8] I. Galic, O. Negris, C. Warren, D. Brown, A. Bozen, T. Jain, Disparities in
access to fertility care: who ’s in and who ’s out, FS Rep 2 (1) (2021)
109–117.
[9] C. Davis, J. Bryan, J. Hodgson, K. Murphy, De ﬁnition of the
Mediterranean diet; a literature review, Nutrients 7 (11) (2015)
9139–9153.
[10] H. Sun, Y. Lin, D. Lin, C. Zou, X. Zou, L. Fu, et al., Mediterranean diet
improves embryo yield in IVF: a prospective cohort study, Reprod. Biol.
Endocrinol. 17 (1) (2019) 73 .
[11] M. Vujkovic, J.H. de Vries, J. Lindemans, N.S. Macklon, P.J. van der
Spek, E.A. Steegers, et al., The preconception Mediterranean dietary
pattern in couples undergoing in vitro fertilization/intracytoplasmic
sperm injection treatment increases the chance of pregnancy, Fertil.
Steril. 94 (6) (2010) 2096 –2101.
[12] D. Karayiannis, M.D. Kontogianni, C. Mendorou, M. Mastrominas,
N. Yiannakouris, Adherence to the Mediterranean diet and IVF success
rate among non-obese women attempting fertility, Hum. Reprod. 33 (3)
(2018) 494 –502.
[13] N.J. Kellow, J. Le Cerf, F. Horta, A.L. Dordevic, C.J. Bennett, The effect
of dietary patterns on clinical pregnancy and live birth outcomes in men
and women receiving assisted reproductive technologies: a systematic
review and meta-analysis, Adv Nutr 13 (3) (2022) 857 –874.
[14] D. Karayiannis, M.D. Kontogianni, C. Mendorou, L. Douka,
M. Mastrominas, N. Yiannakouris, Association between adherence to
the Mediterranean diet and semen quality parameters in male partners
of couples attempting fertility, Hum. Reprod. 32 (1) (2017) 215 –222.
[15] E. Ricci, F. Bravi, S. Noli, S. Ferrari, V. De Cosmi, I. La Vecchia, et al.,
Mediterranean diet and the risk of poor semen quality: cross-sectional
analysis of men referring to an Italian fertility clinic, Andrology 7 (2)
(2019) 156 –162.
[16] A.J. Gaskins, F.L. Nassan, Y.H. Chiu, M. Arvizu, P.L. Williams,
M.G. Keller, et al., Dietary patterns and outcomes of assisted
reproduction, Am. J. Obstet. Gynecol. 220 (6) (2019) 567, e1 –.e18.
[17] A.B. Maldonado-C /C19arceles, L. Mínguez-Alarc /C19on, I. Souter, A.J. Gaskins,
M. Arvizu, P.L. Williams, et al., Dietary patterns and ovarian reserve
among women attending a fertility clinic, Fertil. Steril. 114 (3) (2020)
610–617.
[18] A.M. Eskew, B.S. Bedrick, J.E. Chavarro, J.K. Riley, E.S. Jungheim,
Dietary patterns are associated with improved ovarian reserve in
overweight and obese women: a cross-sectional study of the Lifestyle
and Ovarian Reserve (LORe) cohort, Reprod. Biol. Endocrinol. 20 (1)
(2022) 33 .
[19] R.G.M. de Souza, R.M. Schincaglia, G.D. Pimentel, J.F. Mota, Nuts and
human health outcomes: a systematic review, Nutrients 9 (12) (2017)
1311.
[20] N. Becerra-Tom /C19as, I. Paz-Graniel, C.W.C. Kendall, H. Kahleova,
D. Raheli /C19c, J.L. Sievenpiper, et al., Nut consumption and incidence of
cardiovascular diseases and cardiovascular disease mortality: a meta-
analysis of prospective cohort studies, Nutr. Rev. 77 (10) (2019)
691–709.
[21] A.M. Coates, A.M. Hill, S.Y. Tan, Nuts and cardiovascular disease
prevention, Curr. Atheroscler. Rep. 20 (10) (2018) 48 .
[22] S. Morgillo, A.M. Hill, A.M. Coates, The effects of nut consumption on
vascular function, Nutrients 11 (1) (2019) 116 .
[23] L.E. Theodore, N.J. Kellow, E.A. McNeil, E.O. Close, E.G. Coad,
B.R. Cardoso, Nut consumption for cognitive performance: a systematic
review, Adv. Nutr. 12 (3) (2020) 777 –792.
[24] Y. Kim, J.B. Keogh, P.M. Clifton, does nut consumption reduce mortality
and/or risk of cardiometabolic disease? An updated review based on
meta-analyses, Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health. 16 (24) (2019) 4957 .
[25] E. Viguiliouk, C.W. Kendall, S. Blanco Mejia, A.I. Cozma, V. Ha,
A. Mirrahimi, et al., Effect of tree nuts on glycemic control in diabetes: a
systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled dietary
trials, PLoS One 9 (7) (2014) e103376 .
[26] D. Moher, A. Liberati, J. Tetzlaff, D.G. Altman, Preferred reporting items
for systematic reviews and meta-analyses: the PRISMA statement,
J Clin. Epidemiol. 62 (10) (2009) 1006 –1012.
[27] J.C. Gutierrez, K. Hwang, The toxicity of methotrexate in male fertility
and paternal teratogenicity, Expert Opin. Drug Metab. Toxicol. 13 (1)
(2017) 51 –58, 2017 .
[28] J.A.C. Sterne, J. Savovi /C19c, M.J. Page, R.G. Elbers, N.S. Blencowe, I.
Boutron et al., RoB 2: a revised tool for assessing risk of bias in
randomised trials, BMJ 366 (201) l4898.
[29] J.A. Sterne, M.A. Hern /C19an, B.C. Reeves, J. Savovi /C19c, N.D. Berkman,
M. Viswanathan, et al., ROBINS-I: a tool for assessing risk of bias in non-
randomised studies of interventions, BMJ 355 (2016) i4919 .
[30] I.R. White, J. Thomas, Standardized mean differences in individually-
randomized and cluster-randomized trials, with applications to meta-
analysis, Clin. Trials. 2 (2) (2005) 141 –151.
[31] S. McGrath, X. Zhao, R. Steele, B.D. Thombs, A. Benedetti, Estimating
the sample mean and standard deviation from commonly reported
quantiles in meta-analysis, Stat. Methods Med. Res. 29(9) 2520 –2537.
[32] W.A. Robbins, L. Xun, L.Z. FitzGerald, S. Esguerra, S.M. Henning,
C.L. Carpenter, Walnuts improve semen quality in men consuming a
Western-style diet: randomized control dietary intervention trial, Biol.
Reprod. 87 (4) (2012) 101 .
[33] A. Salas-Huetos, R. Moraleda, S. Giardina, E. Anton, J. Blanco, J. Salas-
Salvad/C19o, et al., Effect of nut consumption on semen quality and
functionality in healthy men consuming a Western-style diet: a
randomized controlled trial, Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 108 (5) (2018) 953 –962.
[34] A. Salas-Huetos, M. Arvizu, L. Mínguez-Alarc /C19on, M. Mitsunami,
J. Ribas-Maynou, M. Yeste, et al., Women's and men's intake of omega-3
fatty acids and their food sources and assisted reproductive technology
outcomes, Am. J. Obstet. Gynecol. 227 (2) (2022) 246, e1 –e11.
[35] T. Y €orüsün, Y. Akdevelio /C21glu, R.O. Karabacak, N. Bozkurt, N. S ¸ anlıer,
S. Yes¸il, et al., Nutritional factors related to male fertility: Turkish
sample, Afr. J. Reprod. Health 24 (2) (2020) 85 –95.
[36] K. Skoracka, A.E. Ratajczak, A.M. Rychter, A. Dobrowolska, I. Krela-
Ka/C19
zmierczak, Female fertility and the nutritional approach: the most
essential aspects, Adv. Nutr. 12 (6) (2021) 2372 –2386.
[37] P.L. Lutsey, L.M. Steffen, J. Stevens, Dietary intake and the development
of the metabolic syndrome, Circulation 117 (6) (2008) 754 –761.
[38] J. Whittaker, Dietary trends and the decline in male reproductive
health, Hormones 22 (2) (2023) 165 –197.
[39] A. Salas-Huetos, M. Bull /C19o, J. Salas-Salvad /C19o, Dietary patterns, foods and
nutrients in male fertility parameters and fecundability: a systematic
review of observational studies, Hum. Reprod. Update 23 (4) (2017)
371–389.
[40] Y. Chung, P. Melo, O. Pickering, R. Dhillon-Smith, A. Coomarasamy,
A. Devall, The association between dietary patterns and risk of
miscarriage: a systematic review and meta-analysis, Fertil. Steril. 120
(2) (2023) 333 –357.
[41] S.L. Mumford, R.W. Browne, K. Kim, C. Nichols, B. Wilcox, R.M. Silver,
et al., Preconception plasma phospholipid fatty acids and fecundability,
J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metabol. 103 (12) (2018) 4501 –4510.
[42] J.E. Chavarro, J.W. Rich-Edwards, B.A. Rosner, W.C. Willett, Dietary
fatty acid intakes and the risk of ovulatory infertility, Am. J. Clin. Nutr.
85 (1) (2007) 231 –237.
[43] M. Kornsteiner-Krenn, K.H. Wagner, I. Elmadfa, Phytosterol content and
fatty acid pattern of ten different nut types, Int. J. Vitam. Nutr. Res. 83
(5) (2013) 263 –270.
[44] E. Ros, L.C. Tapsell, J. Sabat /C19e, Nuts and berries for heart health, Curr.
Atheroscler. Rep. 12 (6) (2010) 397 –406.
[45] B.R. Cardoso, G.B.S. Duarte, B.Z. Reis, S.M.F. Cozzolino, Brazil nuts:
nutritional composition, health bene ﬁts and safety aspects, Food Res.
Int. 100 (Pt 2) (2017) 9 –18.
[46] G. Petrovi /C19c-Oggiano, J. Debeljak-Marta /C20ci/C19c, S. Rankovi /C19c, B. Pokimica,
A. Miri /C19c, M. Glibeti /C19c, et al., The effect of walnut consumption on n-3
fatty acid pro ﬁle of healthy people living in a non-Mediterranean West
Balkan country, a small scale randomized study, Nutrients 12 (1) (2020)
192.
[47] V. Esmaeili, A.H. Shahverdi, M.H. Moghadasian, A.R. Alizadeh, Dietary
fatty acids affect semen quality: a review, Andrology 3 (3) (2015)
450–461.
[48] N.M. Gulaya, V.M. Margitich, N.M. Govseeva, V.M. Klimashevsky,
I.I. Gorpynchenko, M.,I. Boyko, Phospholipid composition of human
sperm and seminal plasma in relation to sperm fertility, Arch. Androl.
46 (3) (2001) 169 –175.
[49] M.R. Safarinejad, Effect of omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acid
supplementation on semen pro ﬁle and enzymatic anti-oxidant capacity
of seminal plasma in infertile men with idiopathic
oligoasthenoteratospermia: a double-blind, placebo-controlled,
randomised study, Andrologia 43 (1) (2011) 38 –47.
[50] D. Sanocka, M. Kurpisz, Reactive oxygen species and sperm cells,
Reprod. Biol. Endocrinol. 2 (2004) 12 .
[51] J.C. Martínez-Soto, J.C. Domingo, B. Cordobilla, M. Nicol /C19as,
L. Fern /C19andez, P. Albero, et al., Dietary supplementation with
docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) improves seminal antioxidant status and
B.R. Cardoso et al. Advances in Nutrition 15 (2024) 100153
12

PDF PAGE 13
decreases sperm DNA fragmentation, Syst. Biol. Reprod. Med. 62 (6)
(2016) 387 –395.
[52] C.J. Byrne, S. Fair, A.M. English, S.A. Holden, J.R. Dick, P. Lonergan, et
al., Dietary polyunsaturated fatty acid supplementation of young post-
pubertal dairy bulls alters the fatty acid composition of seminal plasma
and spermatozoa but has no effect on semen volume or sperm quality,
Theriogenology 90 (2017) 289 –300.
[53] Z. Yu, V.S. Malik, N. Keum, F.B. Hu, E.L. Giovannucci, M.J. Stampfer, et
al., Associations between nut consumption and in ﬂammatory
biomarkers, Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 104 (3) (2016) 722 –778.
[54] M. Cof/C19an, S. Rajaram, A. Sala-Vila, C. Valls-Pedret, M. Serra-Mir, I. Roth,
et al., Effects of 2-year walnut-supplemented diet on in ﬂammatory
biomarkers, J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. 76 (19) (2020) 2282 –2284.
[55] E. Patterson, R. Wall, G.F. Fitzgerald, R.P. Ross, C. Stanton, Health
implications of high dietary omega-6 polyunsaturated fatty acids,
J. Nutr. Metab. 2012 (2012) 539426 .
[56] M.E. Clementi, G. Lazzarino, B. Sampaolese, A. Brancato, G. Tringali,
DHA protects PC12 cells against oxidative stress and apoptotic signals
through the activation of the NFE2L2/HO-1 axis, Int. J. Mol. Med. 43
(6) (2019) 2523 –2531.
[57] W. Zhu, Y. Ding, W. Kong, T. Li, H. Chen, Docosahexaenoic Acid
(DHA) provides neuroprotection in traumatic brain injury models via
activating Nrf2-ARE signaling, In ﬂammation 41 (4) (2018)
1182–1193.
[58] M. Shaaker, A. Rahimipour, M. Nouri, K. Khanaki, M. Darabi, L. Farzadi,
et al., Fatty acid composition of human follicular ﬂuid phospholipids
and fertilization rate in assisted reproductive techniques, Iran Biomed.
J. 16 (3) (2012) 162 –168.
[59] B. Gonçalves, T. Pinto, A. Aires, M.C. Morais, E. Bacelar, R. Anjos, et al.,
Composition of nuts and their potential health bene ﬁts-an overview,
Foods 12 (5) (2023) 942 .
[60] N.G. Tas¸,V .G €okmen, Phenolic compounds in natural and roasted nuts
and their skins: a brief review, Curr. Opin. Food Sci. 14 (2017)
103–109.
[61] US Department of Agriculture (USDA) and US Department of Health
and Human Services (HHS), Dietary Guidelines for Americans, 2020,
2025, https://www.dietaryguidelines.gov/sites/default/ﬁles/2020-12/
Dietary_Guidelines_for_Americans_2020-2025.pdf. (Accessed 1 July
2023).
[62] C. Mora-Esteves, D. Shin, Nutrient supplementation: improving male
fertility fourfold, Semin. Reprod. Med. 31 (4) (2013) 293 –300.
[63] A. Agarwal, M. Rana, E. Qiu, H. AlBunni, A.D. Bui, R. Henkel, Role of
oxidative stress, infection and in ﬂammation in male infertility,
Andrologia 50 (11) (2018) e13126 .
[64] J. Wojsiat, J. Korczy /C19nski, M. Borowiecka, H.M. _Zbikowska, The role of
oxidative stress in female infertility and in vitro fertilization, Postepy
Hig. Med. Dosw. 71 (0) (2017) 359 –366.
[65] A. Agarwal, S. Gupta, R.K. Sharma, Role of oxidative stress in female
reproduction, Reprod. Biol. Endocrinol. 3 (2005) 28 .
[66] S. Bisht, M. Faiq, M. Tolahunase, R. Dada, Oxidative stress and male
infertility, Nat. Rev. Urol. 14 (8) (2017) 470 –485.
[67] S.J. Chen, J.P. Allam, Y.G. Duan, G. Haidl, In ﬂuence of reactive oxygen
species on human sperm functions and fertilizing capacity including
therapeutical approaches, Arch. Gynecol. Obstet. 288 (1) (2013)
191–199.
[68] J. Zhao, Q. Zhang, Y. Wang, Y. Li, Whether sperm deoxyribonucleic acid
fragmentation has an effect on pregnancy and miscarriage after in vitro
fertilization/intracytoplasmic sperm injection: a systematic review and
meta-analysis, Fertil. Steril. 102 (4) (2014) 998 –1005.e8.
[69] F. Dimitriadis, H. Borgmann, J.P. Struck, J. Salem, T.H. Kuru,
Antioxidant supplementation on male fertility-a systematic review,
Antioxidants (Basel) 12 (4) (2023) 836 .
[70] A. Farkouh, A. Agarwal, T.A.A. Hamoda, P. Kavoussi, R. Saleh, A. Zini,
et al., Controversy and consensus on the management of elevated sperm
DNA fragmentation in male infertility: a global survey, current
guidelines, and expert recommendations, World J. Mens Health 41 (4)
(2023) 809 –847.
[71] G.D. Jones, B. Droz, P. Greve, P. Gottschalk, D. Poffet, S.P. McGrath, et
al., Selenium de ﬁciency risk predicted to increase under future climate
change, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 114 (11) (2017) 2848 –2853.
[72] C.R. Dahlen, L.P. Reynolds, J.S. Caton, Selenium supplementation and
pregnancy outcomes, Front. Nutr. 9 (2022) 1011850 .
[73] I.H. Qazi, C. Angel, H. Yang, E. Zoidis, B. Pan, Z. Wu, et al., Role of
selenium and selenoproteins in male reproductive function: a review of
past and present evidences, Antioxidants (Basel) 8 (8) (2019) 268 .
[74] D. Allouche-Fitoussi, H. Breitbart, The role of zinc in male fertility, Int.
J. Mol. Sci. 21 (20) (2020) 7796 .
[75] T.B. Garner, J.M. Hester, A. Carothers, F.J. Diaz, Role of zinc in female
reproduction, Biol. Reprod. 104 (5) (2021) 976 –994.
[76] N. Saadati, F. Haidari, M. Barati, R. Nikbakht, G. Mirmomeni, F. Rahim,
The effect of low glycemic index diet on the reproductive and clinical
proﬁle in women with polycystic ovarian syndrome: a systematic
review and meta-analysis, Heliyon 7 (11) (2021) e08338 .
[77] I.M. Agbaje, D.A. Rogers, C.M. McVicar, N. McClure, A.B. Atkinson,
C. Mallidis, et al., Insulin dependant diabetes mellitus: implications for
male reproductive function, Hum Reprod 22 (7) (2007) 1871 –1877.
[78] M. Farazi, M.J. Houghton, M. Murray, G. Williamson, A systematic
review of the inhibitory effect of extracts from edible parts of nuts on
α-glucosidase activity, Food Funct 13 (2023) .
[79] E. Fitzgerald, K. Lambert, J. Stanford, E.P. Neale, The effect of nut
consumption (tree nuts and peanuts) on the gut microbiota of humans: a
systematic review, Br. J. Nutr. 125 (5) (2021) 508 –520.
[80] X. Li, Y. Wang, J. Zhou, Z. Wang, Y. Wang, J. Zheng, et al., Mixed nuts
with high nutrient density improve insulin resistance in mice by gut
microbiota remodeling, Food Funct 13 (19) (2022) 9904 –9917.
[81] M. Cozzolino, A. Vitagliano, L. Pellegrini, M. Chiurazzi, A. Andriasani,
G. Ambrosini, et al., Therapy with probiotics and synbiotics for
polycystic ovarian syndrome: a systematic review and meta-analysis,
Eur. J. Nutr. 59 (7) (2020) 2841 –2856.
[82] D. Santi, F. Lotti, C. Sparano, G. Rastrelli, A.M. Isidori, R. Pivonello, et
al., Does an increase in adipose tissue 'weight' affect male fertility? A
systematic review and meta-analysis based on semen analysis
performed using the WHO 2010 criteria, Andrology (2023). May 25 .
[83] A. Armstrong, M. Berger, Z. Al-Sa ﬁ, Obesity and reproduction, Curr.
Opin. Obstet. Gynecol. 34 (4) (2022) 184 –189.
[84] S.K. Nishi, E. Viguiliouk, S. Blanco Mejia, C.W.C. Kendall, R.P. Bazinet,
A.J. Hanley, et al., Are fatty nuts a weighty concern? A systematic
review and meta-analysis and dose-response meta-regression of
prospective cohorts and randomized controlled trials, Obes. Rev. 22
(11) (2021) e13330 .
[85] C.J. Nikodijevic, Y.C. Probst, S.-Y. Tan, E.P. Neale, The effects of tree
nut and peanut consumption on energy compensation and energy
expenditure: a systematic review and meta-analysis, Adv. Nutr. 14 (1)
(2023) 77 –98.
[86] P. Casas-Agustench, P. L /C19opez-Uriarte, M. Bull /C19o, E. Ros, A. G /C19omez-Flores,
J. Salas-Salvad /C19o, Acute effects of three high-fat meals with different fat
saturations on energy expenditure, substrate oxidation and satiety, Clin.
Nutr. 28 (1) (2009) 39 –45.
B.R. Cardoso et al. Advances in Nutrition 15 (2024) 100153
13