PDF PAGE 1
Abstract Chimpanzees ( Pan troglodytes ) are the most
proficient and versatile users of tools in the wild. How such
skills become integrated into the behavioural repertoire of
wild chimpanzee communities is investigated here by draw-
ing together evidence from three complementary approaches
in a group of oil-palm nut- ( Elaeis guineensis) cracking
chimpanzees at Bossou, Guinea. First, extensive surveys
of communities adjacent to Bossou have shown that pop-
ulation-specific details of tool use, such as the selection of
species of nuts as targets for cracking, cannot be explained
purely on the basis of ecological differences. Second, a
16-year longitudinal record tracing the development of nut-
cracking in individual chimpanzees has highlighted the
importance of a critical period for learning (3–5 years of age),
while the similar learning contexts experienced by sib-
lings have been found to result in near-perfect (13 out of
14 dyads) inter-sibling correspondence in laterality. Third,
novel data from field experiments involving the introduc-
tion of unfamiliar species of nuts to the Bossou group il-
luminates key aspects of both cultural innovation and trans-
mission. We show that responses of individuals toward the
novel items differ markedly with age, with juveniles being
the most likely to explore. Furthermore, subjects are highly
specific in their selection of conspecifics as models for
observation, attending to the nut-cracking activities of in-
dividuals in the same age group or older, but not younger
than themselves. Together with the phenomenon of inter-
community migration, these results demonstrate a mecha-
nism for the emergence of culture in wild chimpanzees.
Keywords Chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes verus) · Tool
use · Social transmission · Culture
Introduction
Over the decades that followed the discovery of termite-
fishing at Gombe (Goodall 1964), examples of tool-use
reported in wild chimpanzee populations have steadily in-
creased in number. Long-term research at various sites
around Africa has highlighted considerable variation among
communities in the nature of objects that chimpanzees use
as tools as well as the items in the environment that serve
as targets toward which the tools are directed (Boesch and
Boesch-Achermann 2000; Nishida 1990; Goodall 1986).
Patterns in the presence or absence of distinctive tool us-
ing traditions at particular sites are now seen as defining
features of unique chimpanzee cultures (McGrew 1992;
Whiten et al. 1999; Yamakoshi 2001). A recent survey of
geographic variation in orangutans’ (Pongo pygmaeus) tool
use and social signals has identified a corresponding pat-
tern (van Schaik et al. 2003), and mountain gorillas ( Go-
rilla gorilla beringei ) are also known to exhibit not only
individual but also regional variation in food processing
skills (Byrne and Byrne 1993). However, the basis upon
which such site-to-site differences are maintained is still a
controversial issue (Tomasello 1994). While ecological fac-
tors
are likely to account for at least some of the variation
observed (Baldwin et al. 1981), the question remains whether
population-specific traditions are maintained through in-
ter-population genetic differences or some form of post-
natal learning. Furthermore, if individual learning is in-
volved, is it reliant upon information being passed from
one member of a group to another in a social context, or is
the skill acquired independently by every individual dur-
ing ontogenesis (Kummer 1971)? So far, answers to ques-
tions probing the potential for transmission of traditions
among wild populations of chimpanzees have only been
Dora Biro · Noriko Inoue-Nakamura · Rikako Tonooka ·
Gen Yamakoshi · Claudia Sousa · Tetsuro Matsuzawa
Cultural innovation and transmission of tool use in wild chimpanzees: 
evidence from field experiments
Anim Cogn (2003) 6 : 213–223
DOI 10.1007/s10071-003-0183-x
Received: 1 August 2002 / Revised: 25 June 2003 / Accepted: 26 June 2003 / Published online: 29 July 2003
ORIGINAL ARTICLE
D. Biro (✉ ) · N. Inoue-Nakamura · R. Tonooka · G. Yamakoshi ·
T. Matsuzawa
Primate Research Institute, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan
e-mail: dora.biro@zoology.oxford.ac.uk
C. Sousa
Departamento de Antropologia, 
Faculdade de Ciencias Sociais e Humanas, 
Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Portugal
Present address:
D. Biro 
Animal Behaviour Research Group, Department of Zoology, 
University of Oxford, South Parks Road, Oxford, OX1 3PS, UK
© Springer-Verlag 2003

PDF PAGE 2
available through inference from the geographical distri-
bution of particular tool-using behaviours (Boesch et al.
1994; McGrew et al. 1997; Whiten et al. 1999). Studies
which trace the appearance of a novel tradition and its sub-
sequent spread within a community have been extremely
rare (Boesch 1995). Here we present the first attempt at
drawing together evidence from a variety of different sources
to construct a model for the establishment and mainte-
nance of cultural traditions unique to particular wild chim-
panzee
communities. Our conclusions are based on data
collected from three complementary sources: (1) exten-
sive field surveys charting the regional distribution of a
specific tool-using behaviour, (2) long-term records track-
ing the developmental course of individual acquisition of
the skill, and (3) a field experiment demonstrating aspects
of innovation and transmission through observational
learning.
Methods
Study sites and populations
The long-term study of chimpanzees at Bossou (7°39 ′N, 8°30′W),
Guinea, West Africa began in 1976 (Sugiyama 1981, 1984), since
which time the size of the community has remained relatively sta-
ble, currently numbering 19 individuals (lowest: 16, highest: 23),
of whom 12 are females and 7 are males. The core area of the com-
munity’s range encompasses 5–6 km
2 composed of primary and
secondary forest, surrounded on all sides by dry savannah which
the chimpanzees have never been seen to traverse.
Neighbouring groups inhabit the Nimba Mountains to the
south-east: the nearest community so far identified occupies the
forest bordering the village of Seringbara, only 6 km away. The
study of chimpanzees at another Nimba site, near the village of
Yeale (Cote d’Ivoire; 12 km to the south-east of Bossou), is now
also underway (Yamakoshi and Matsuzawa 1993; Humle and Mat-
suzawa 2001). In addition, the presence of chimpanzees at Diecke
forest, at a distance of 50 km to the west, has recently been con-
firmed (Matsuzawa et al. 1999). It is suspected that immigration
between Bossou and Nimba has been possible until the recent past
(with the last recorded immigration to Bossou, with high probabil-
ity from Nimba, having occurred in 1982; Sugiyama 1984), whereas
that between Bossou and Diecke has been prevented by the lack of
continuous vegetation for decades (at least 50 years).
Data collection
Evidence of nut-cracking was collected at all four sites, either
through direct observation or by locating traces of the behaviour
such as broken shells scattered near pairs of stones. In the case of
trace evidence, strict criteria (e.g. the presence of chimpanzee
knuckle or footprints no more than 5 m from the site of nut-crack-
ing) were applied before assigning the findings to chimpanzee ac-
tivity (Humle and Matsuzawa 2001). The species of nuts cracked
was determined in each case. The vegetation was surveyed and lo-
cal guides questioned as to the availability of hard-shelled nuts in
each community’s home range.
Intensive study of nut-cracking was conducted at Bossou, be-
ginning in 1988. Observations were carried out in a small clearing
in the forest (“outdoor laboratory”; Matsuzawa 1994) located on
the summit of Mont Gban, south of the village of Bossou. The
clearing was roughly rectangular, 7 × 20 m, with dense forest on
three sides, and a wall on the fourth constructed from branches and
leaves behind which the experimenters hid, out of view of the
chimpanzees. Several paths used regularly by the chimpanzees to
traverse Mont Gban converged in this clearing, such that parties of
chimpanzees visited the outdoor laboratory regularly, on average
once a day. When stones and nuts were made available by the ex-
perimenters, the chimpanzees stopped to crack in the majority of
cases.
Through the years we recorded nut-cracking ability (or lack
thereof) in every member of the community along with the identity
of the hand used to hold the hammer stone while performing the
behaviour. Data were collected in the dry season, December to
February, over a total of 20–30 h of observation each year.
Introduction of novel nuts
Along with the familiar piles of stones and oil-palm nuts ( Elaeis
guineensis), we provided the group at Bossou with exposure to
hitherto unfamiliar coula (Coula edulis) and panda (Panda oleosa)
nuts (Fig. 1) in the outdoor laboratory. The novel nuts were pre-
sented on a daily basis over a 2-week period during the regular
field season (see above). Coula nuts were provided in 4 years:
1993, 1996, 2000, and 2002. Panda nuts were presented in 2000.
All the materials necessary for nut-cracking at the outdoor lab-
oratory were provided by the experimenters. A total of 48 individ-
ually numbered stones were used, the largest weighing 5 kg, the
smallest 0.2 kg (mean 1.2 kg, SD 1.0). These were collected from
various locations around Bossou, and care was taken to ensure that
no other hard objects were available at the site. Oil-palm nuts were
provided in 12 small piles of 40–50 nuts each (approx. 500 g per
pile), scattered around the clearing. Piles were replenished follow-
ing each visit by the chimpanzees to the outdoor laboratory (be-
tween once and twice a day, on average). Panda nuts were first pre-
sented 3 at a time, arranged in a row 10 cm apart, then in a pile of
10 in a conspicuous location near the centre of the clearing. Coula
nuts were provided in two piles of 30 nuts each (containing ap-
proximately equal proportions of both ripe and unripe exemplars),
resembling in size the piles formed by the other two kinds of nuts.
As neither panda nor coula nuts are naturally available at Bossou,
they were instead collected at and brought from Diecke forest and
the Nimba mountains, respectively. Nuts continued to be presented
daily, until all members of the community had visited the outdoor
laboratory and thus had access to the novel nuts over at least four
sessions in each year that the experiments were conducted.
From behind the man-made wall of vegetation at one end of the
outdoor laboratory (at a distance of approximately 20 m from the
cracking site), we were able to note the responses of individuals to
the unfamiliar nuts. Besides live observation, all visits by the
214
Fig. 1 Photograph showing the three species of hard-shelled nut
used in the study. From left to right: oil-palm nuts (Elaeis guineen-
sis), coula nuts (Coula edulis), and panda nuts (Panda oleosa). For
each species, three stages are shown: A fruit, B hard-shelled con-
tents of fruit before cracking, andC after cracking, with edible ker-
nels visible

PDF PAGE 3
chimpanzees to the outdoor laboratory were videotaped from dif-
ferent angles by two or three video cameras simultaneously (Sony
Digital Handicam, DCR-VX1000).
Results
Survey of neighbouring communities
Chimpanzee communities at three of the four sites exam-
ined (Bossou, Yeale, and Diecke) were found to include
individuals who used a pair of stones as hammer and anvil
to crack open hard-shelled nuts (Humle and Matsuzawa
2001). However, as Table 1 shows, the range of target nut
215
Table 1 Species of nuts cracked by wild chimpanzees at Bossou,
Seringbara, Yeale, and Diecke. – indicates that the target nut spe-
cies is not available at the site, while No indicates that no evidence
of cracking by the chimpanzees has so far been found even though
the nuts are available
Site Distance Species of nut
from 
Bossou Oil-palm Coula Panda 
(Elaeis (Coula (Panda 
guineensis) edulis) oleosa)
Bossou 7°39′N 8°30′W – Yes – –
Seringbara 7°38′N 8°25′W 6 km No – –
Yeale 7°32′N 8°25′W 12 km Yes Yes No
Diecke 7°38′N 8°55′W 50 km No Yes Yes
Name Sex Age Mother Year observed
88 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 02 03
Tua M Adult N.A. ? L L L L L L L L L L L L L
Kai F Adult N.A. ? R R R R R R R R R R R R R
Kie
a F 27 Kai ? R R – – – – – – – – – – –
Kakurua F 16 Kie ? A R – – – – – – – – – – –
Nina F Adult N.A. ? X X X X X X X X X X X X X
Na
a M 17 Nina ? R R R R R R – – – – – – –
Ntoa F 9.5 Nina – – – – – X X X R R R R – –
Fana F Adult N.A. ? L L L L L L R R R R R R R
Foaf M 22 Fana ? R R R R R R R R R R R R R
Fotayu F 11 Fana – – – X X X AR R R R R R R R
Fokaiye M 1.5 Fotayu – – – – – – – – – – – – X X
Fanle F 5.5 Fana – – – – – – – – – X X X R R
Jire F Adult N.A. ? L L L L L L L L L L L L L
Ja
a F 19 Jire ? R R R R – – – – – – – – –
Jokrob F (3) Jire – X X X – – – – – – – – – –
Julua F 9 Jire – – – – – X X X X r r r – –
Jeje M 5 Jire – – – – – – – – – X X X X X
Jimatou M 0.5 Jire – – – – – – – – – – – – – X
Velu F Adult N.A. ? R R R R R R R R R R R R R
Vube
a F 20 Velu ? L – – – – – – – – – – – –
Vuia M 16 Velu ? X X L L L L L L L L – – –
Vuavua F 11 Velu – – – X X X AL L L L L L L L
Veve F 1.5 Vuavua – – – – – – – – – – – – X X
Yo F Adult N.A. ? L L L L L L L L L L L L L
Yunro
a F 18 Yo ? X X X l – – – – – – – – –
Yelab M (0.5) Yo – X – – – – – – – – – – – –
Yoroa M 11 Yo – – – X X X X L L L L L L L
Pama F Adult N.A. ? X X X X X X X X X X X X X
Puru
a M 22 Pama R R R – – – – – – – – – – –
Pilia F 15.5 Pama ? X R R R R R R R R R R – –
Pokrua M 6.5 Pili – – – – – – – – X X X X – –
Poni M 10 Pama – – – – X X X R R R R R R R
Peley F 4.5 Pama – – – – – – – – – – X X AL L
a Individual disappeared prior to January 2003
b Individual confirmed dead
Table 2 Longitudinal record of stone-tool use by chimpanzees at
Bossou, Guinea. Individuals are sorted according to matrilinial
kinship. Oil-palm nut-cracking ability (or lack thereof) and hand
used to hold hammer stone recorded for all individuals since 1988
(L Always uses left hand for hammer; R always uses right hand for
hammer; A ambidextrous use of hammer; l uses left hand to pound
nut without a hammer; r uses right hand to pound nut without a
hammer; X no successful hammer use but eating nuts cracked by
others; ? data unavailable due to lack of observation; - data un-
available as subject had not yet been born, had disappeared, or
died; N.A. not available; age represents estimate as of January
2003; figures in brackets represent age at which individual died)

PDF PAGE 4
species for the behaviour is unique in each community.
Raw materials necessary for oil-palm nut-cracking – dried
nuts and stones – are available at Bossou, Seringbara, and
Yeale (density of oil-palm trees at the three sites: 7.2/km
2,
1.0/km2, 4.2/km 2, respectively; Humle 2003), however,
only the chimpanzees of Bossou and Yeale are known to
perform the behaviour. In addition, the panda nut is avail-
able at Yeale and Diecke (rare in Yeale and 5/200 trees in
Diecke; T Humle, H Takemoto, personal communication),
yet only at the latter site have traces of cracking been
found (Matsuzawa et al. 1999). Meanwhile, the coula nut is
available at the same pair of sites (at a density of 5.0/km 2
in Yeale, and in clumped patches near the edge of the for-
est in Diecke), and is cracked at both.
Longitudinal record of skill acquisition
Table 2 presents a summary of data gathered for individ-
ual nut-cracking activity for all the chimpanzees sighted
at Bossou over a period of 16 years. Such a long-term
record has allowed us to highlight aspects of the skill on
the individual level. We have identified a sensitive period
in acquisition between the ages of 3 and 5 years (Matsu-
zawa 1994; Inoue-Nakamura and Matsuzawa 1997). Dur-
ing this time the infant remains in close proximity of the
mother, who in turn serves as the primary model for the
infant’s observation of nut-cracking activity performed by
conspecifics, particularly in the early stages of acquisi-
tion. If not learnt by the end of this period, the skill will
not be acquired and individuals instead become habitual
scroungers of others’ abandoned half-cracked nuts. Be-
tween the ages of 8 and 14 years, performance gradually
reaches an asymptote, with highly skilled individuals of-
ten requiring no more than a couple of blows of the ham-
mer to extract the edible kernels (Fig. 2). Besides the ne-
cessity to co-ordinate three objects in a specific spatial
and temporal order (Matsuzawa 1996), several other char-
acteristics of stone-tool use obey general rules, such as the
tendency to select anvils heavier than hammers (average
weights 2.6 kg and 1.0 kg, respectively). However, indi-
viduals have also demonstrated considerable flexibility in
the selection of tools (Sakura and Matsuzawa 1991), such
as the use of a metatool, or tool-for-another-tool, where a
third stone is used as a prop for a slanted anvil (Matsu-
zawa 1991). Taken together, these features make oil-palm
nut-cracking using a pair of stones one of the most com-
plex forms of tool use observed in the wild.
Once acquired, the behaviour takes on a highly stereo-
typed appearance (Fig. 3). Bossou chimpanzees demon-
strate perfect laterality in nut-cracking, with all individu-
als using either the left or the right hand on every occasion
(Sugiyama et al. 1993; the only exception being Fana
who, in 1996, switched from left-handed to right-handed
cracking, following the onset of paralysis of the left arm).
Of the ten mother-offspring relationships where the crack-
ing hand of both the mother and the offspring was known,
in only four cases did we find correspondence in laterality
(binomial test: P =0.205). In contrast, the degree of inter-
sibling agreement in laterality is striking (Matsuzawa
1999). Currently, 13 of 14 comparisons of siblings where
two or more offspring of the same mother survived to ac-
quire nut-cracking skills demonstrate correspondence in
laterality: a statistically significant departure from ran-
domness (binomial test: P >0.001). Only a single individ-
ual (Peley) has developed divergent preferences in the
identity of the cracking hand from that of his siblings, all
of whom are descended from a non-nut-cracking mother
(Pama).
Introduction of novel panda and coula nuts
Cracking of novel nuts
Individuals who comprised the group at the time of the
study each year were divided into three age groups for the
purposes of analysis: adults (based on the earliest age at
which first parturition has been observed at Bossou: 9 years
and above), juveniles (5–8 years), and infants (based on
age at weaning: 0–4 years). Chimpanzees’ responses to
the unfamiliar nuts were classified into one of three gen-
eral categories. First, “ignore” described individuals who
displayed no visible signs of interest towards the nuts:
they neither approached them, nor looked at or handled
them in any way. Second, “explore” comprised the behav-
iour of individuals who looked at closely, handled, sniffed,
mouthed, or bit into nuts. Finally, “crack” included all at-
tempts when a nut was placed on an anvil stone and when
a hammer was used to deliver blows in the manner used
for oil-palm nuts, whether or not the cracking efforts were
eventually successful. Table 3 shows the proportions of
group
members exhibiting the three different types of re-
sponses in each year when the experiments were conducted.
In the case of coula nuts, the behaviour of one individ-
ual was of particular interest: an adult female named Yo
(estimated age in 2002: 40 years) who, from the very first
presentation of coula proceeded to crack the nuts with all
216
Fig. 2 Average number of hammer blows required to crack a sin-
gle oil-palm nut as a function of age. Data collected in 1999 by
D.B. and T.M. Filled circles represent the performance of individ-
ual chimpanzees who were able to crack nuts, while open circles
show age distribution of individuals who were never seen to suc-
ceed at cracking. Error bars are standard errors of the mean

PDF PAGE 5
217
the signs of familiarity – that is without any form of ex-
ploratory behaviour (Matsuzawa and Yamakoshi 1996).
The hard shell of coula nuts is covered by a thin layer of
dried fruit and there is no obvious indication that an edi-
ble part is concealed below both of these layers. Never-
theless, Yo never tried to bite or chew the outer layer; in-
stead she cracked to extract the kernel. Furthermore, she
showed a clear preference for dark-coloured, ripe coula
nuts (which are customarily cracked at other sites) over
green, unripe ones, carefully removing all of the former from
the mixed piles, and cracking them all before moving on
to the latter. All other individuals who eventually went on
to crack coula nuts did so after extensive sniffing and han-
dling.
While in the initial series of presentation adult mem-
bers of the group, with the notable exception of Yo, did not
crack coula nuts – and of the remaining adults only half
showed any interest in the novel items – all of the juve-
niles proceeded to either crack or explore them. Through
the years of repeated presentation, such high levels of in-
terest were sustained in this age group (at least 60% of ju-
veniles cracking in each of the following years), while the
percentage of adults attempting to crack coula gradually
rose from 11% in 1993 to 33% in 1996, 40% in 2000, and
67% in 2002. This was partly due to juveniles who had al-
ready cracked in previous years growing up to adulthood,
and partly to adults who had shown only exploratory be-
haviours in the first year or two eventually moving on to
cracking (among the nine individuals who were already in
the adult category in 1993, this was a significant increase:
Cochran’s Q =9.75, df =3, P =0.021). By the years 2000
and 2002, coula nuts had become popular targets for crack-
ing, so much so that several individuals altogether aban-
doned oil-palm nut-cracking in the outdoor laboratory, fo-
cusing instead on the limited number of available coula
nuts.
Results from the panda nut experiment presented a
contrast to the above. Of the 13 individuals who were able
to crack oil-palm nuts in 2000, only four attempted to
crack the hitherto unfamiliar nuts. Two (including Yo) were
adult females and two were juveniles. All four displayed
exploratory behaviours of sniffing and mouthing before
cracking, and after succeeding to crush the shell, the ker-
nel was again sniffed then cautiously chewed. The only
other three individuals who showed any interest in panda
nuts were youngsters (two juveniles and one infant), two
of whom were unable to crack nuts by themselves; they
sniffed and held panda nuts in their hands before dropping
and abandoning them. The remaining 13 chimpanzees
Fig. 3a–d Sequence of actions in a typical bout of nut cracking.
An adult male, Na, first places a single oil-palm nut on an anvil
stone using his left hand (a). He then uses a hammer stone, held in
the right hand, to pound the nut repeatedly ( b). Once the outer
shell is broken, he retrieves the kernel with the left hand ( c) and
eats it (d). While members of the Bossou community include both
left- and right-handed nut-crackers, for any one chimpanzee the
use of the left and right hands in the four stages of nut-cracking il-
lustrated here show perfect concordance across bouts (photos
taken in Jan. 1995)

PDF PAGE 6
never approached or investigated panda nuts. This lack of
interest was soon assumed by the two adult females as well,
who after a single successful bout of panda-nut-cracking
abandoned all further cracking efforts during subsequent
sessions. Only in the two juveniles’ case did cracking at-
tempts continue, even though no further nuts were cracked.
Perhaps the most relevant analysis in the case of the
panda experiment is the comparison with the initial pre-
sentation of coula nuts. For this analysis, we selected all
of those individuals within the group who were present
both during the coula 1993 and the panda 2000 studies,
and were already within the juvenile or adult categories
during both, thus creating a matched group (i.e. infants, at
most 1.5 years old during coula 1993, and adults and ju-
veniles who disappeared before panda 2000 were ex-
cluded). Although in both experiments an equal number
of such individuals attempted to crack the novel nuts (2 of
10 subjects), when the proportion of individuals showing
any kind of interest in the two species is examined the dif-
ference is significant, with more individuals cracking or
exploring coula nuts than panda nuts, as opposed to ig-
noring them (Cochran’s Q =4, df =1, P =0.046).
Observation of nut-cracking conspecifics
Individuals who made cracking attempts at unfamiliar ob-
jects often elicited great interest in conspecifics (Fig. 4).
Occasionally a whole group would gather around a single
nut-cracking individual. Whether some individuals were
preferentially selected as models for observation was anal-
ysed by noting the identity of observers and the targets of
their observation. Observation of one group member by
another was said to take place when the latter approached
the former to within a distance of 1 m and remained with
gaze fixed upon the target individual’s face or hands for at
least 3 continuous seconds. Rates of observation were cal-
culated as the number of bouts of observation per hour of
nuts being handled or cracked by at least one of two or
more individuals present in the outdoor laboratory.
We recorded a total of 203 observation bouts across four
experiments (oil-palm, coula, and panda in 2000, and coula
in 2002). Adult observers directed their observations to-
wards related individuals (siblings, offspring, mother) in
218
Table 3 Responses of chim-
panzees in three different age
classes to oil-palm nuts as well as
to the presentation of novel spe-
cies of nuts. N Number of indi-
viduals within a particular age
group in given year. Values show
number of individuals in each age
group who attempted to crack the
nuts (Crack), those who displayed
an interest in the nuts, including
handling intact nuts or eating left-
overs cracked by others but did
not attempt to crack themselves
(Explore), and those who were
never observed to show any inter-
est in the nuts (Ignore). Values in
brackets are proportions of the to-
tal number of individuals in the
respective age group
a Letters indicate authors’ initials:
DB Dora Biro, NI Noriko Inoue-
Nakamura, RT Rikako Tonooka,
GY Gen Yamakoshi, CS Claudia
Sousa, TM Tetsuro Matsuzawa
Age Nut/year Data collected by a N Crack Explore Ignore
group
Adult Oil-palm 2000 TM, DB, CS 10 8 (0.80) 2 (0.20) 0 (0.00)
Coula 1993 TM, NI, RT, GY 9 1 (0.11) 4 (0.44) 4 (0.44)
Coula 1996 TM, NI 9 3 (0.33) 0 (0.00) 6 (0.67)
Coula 2000 TM, DB, CS 10 4 (0.40) 3 (0.30) 3 (0.30)
Coula 2002 TM, DB, CS 9 6 (0.67) 1 (0.11) 2 (0.22)
Panda 2000 TM, DB, CS 10 2 (0.20) 0 (0.00) 8 (0.80)
Juvenile Oil-palm 2000 TM, DB, CS 6 5 (0.83) 1 (0.17) 0 (0.00)
Coula 1993 TM, NI, RT, GY 4 2 (0.50) 2 (0.50) 0 (0.00)
Coula 1996 TM, NI 5 3 (0.60) 0 (0.00) 2 (0.40)
Coula 2000 TM, DB, CS 6 4 (0.66) 2 (0.33) 0 (0.00)
Coula 2002 TM, DB, CS 4 3 (0.75) 0 (0.00) 1 (0.25)
Panda 2000 TM, DB, CS 6 2 (0.33) 2 (0.33) 2 (0.33)
Infant Oil-palm 2000 TM, DB, CS 4 0 (0.00) 4 (1.00) 0 (0.00)
Coula 1993 TM, NI, RT, GY 4 0 (0.00) 0 (0.00) 4 (1.00)
Coula 1996 TM, NI 4 0 (0.00) 0 (0.00) 4 (1.00)
Coula 2000 TM, DB, CS 4 0 (0.00) 4 (1.00) 0 (0.00)
Coula 2002 TM, DB, CS 5 1 (0.20) 2 (0.40) 2 (0.40)
Panda 2000 TM, DB, CS 4 0 (0.00) 1 (0.25) 3 (0.75)
Fig. 4 An adult female, Yo, cracks newly-introduced coula nuts
while two juveniles observe her actions closely. Yo was the only
member of the group to crack coula nuts without initial sniffing or
other exploratory behaviours. Her cracking often attracted the at-
tention of chimpanzees from all age classes. Note the row of three
panda nuts in the lower left corner ( left arrow), which Yo com-
pletely ignored on this occasion. The pile of coula nuts is visible
on the right (up arrow)

PDF PAGE 7
12.9% of cases (4 of 31 observations), juveniles in 13.3%
of cases (13 of 98 observations) and infants in 55.4%
cases (41 to 74 observations). Infants thus chose related
individuals for observation significantly more often than
adults or juveniles did (
χ2 =41.088, df =2, P <0.0001). For
both juveniles and infants, the related individual chosen
for observation was predominantly the mother (84.6%
and 90.2% of observations of related individuals, respec-
tively), rather than a sibling.
Adults served as the targets of observation in 170 cases,
juveniles in 33, while infants were never observed. Data
for rates of observation of individuals (square root trans-
formed to meet assumptions of normality and homogene-
ity of variance) was analysed using a General Linear Model
(rate of observation = observer’s age + nut species), re-
vealing a significant effect of age on the rate at which in-
dividuals in the three different age classes served as tar-
gets of observation (F
2,7 =21.36, P =0.001), but not of nut
species (F2,7 =1.11, P =0.383). Figure 5 shows that adults
were not only the most likely to be the targets of observa-
tion but also the least likely to be observers themselves.
On the other hand, juveniles were rarely targets but often
observers, both of adults and of other juveniles. A one-
way ANOV A showed that the rates of observations tar-
geted towards individuals in the same age class or older
were significantly higher than those targeted towards younger
conspecifics (F1,34 =20.91, P <0.001). In general, the data
clearly show that the chimpanzees paid attention to the
nut-cracking activities of individuals in the same age class
or older, but not younger than themselves.
Discussion
The cracking of hard-shelled nuts using a pair of stones as
hammer and anvil is one of the most complex tool-using
skills found in the wild, which so far appears to be re-
stricted to certain West African chimpanzee communities
(Boesch et al. 1994; McGrew et al. 1997). At Bossou,
Guinea, it was first discovered in 1978 (Sugiyama and
Koman 1979) and has been studied extensively since
1988 (Matsuzawa 1994; Matsuzawa et al. 2001). At this
site, the community’s relative isolation may have facili-
tated the emergence of a particular constellation of behav-
ioural traditions; in other words, the establishment of
Bossou chimpanzees’ own unique culture. How might the
cracking of oil-palm nuts using stone anvils and hammers
have entered the behavioural repertoire of the Bossou
community and what ensures its continued existence? We
examined three separate yet complementary lines of evi-
dence in order to provide a model for the emergence and
maintenance of such tool-using traditions in wild chim-
panzee communities. Our approach combines data from
an extensive geographical survey, longitudinal records of
skill acquisition by individuals, and field experiments ex-
amining innovation and social transmission in the selec-
tion of targets for tool use. We will discuss the results ob-
tained through these approaches below, focusing on (1)
ecological contributions to regional variation in wild chim-
panzees’ tool use, (2) intra-community transmission of tool
use and aspects of learning on the individual level, and (3)
processes underlying inter-community transmission.
Ecological factors are not sufficient to explain 
regional variation in nut-cracking
Members of two of three recently discovered communi-
ties adjacent to Bossou (Yeale and Diecke) include indi-
viduals who use a pair of stones as hammer and anvil to
crack open hard-shelled nuts; however, the species of nut
chimpanzees use as targets of the behaviour differ among
these neighbouring groups. Our survey of the vegetation
in the home ranges of all four communities revealed no
clear relationship between the presence of one or more of
219
Fig. 5 Individuals in different age classes as targets of observation
by conspecifics. Incidents of one chimpanzee observing another
handling or cracking oil-palm, coula, and panda nuts were recorded.
Observers were also assigned to one of the three age classes: adult,
juvenile and infant. Values were calculated as occurrences per
hour. Total time only concluded periods where either exploratory
behaviours or nut-cracking attempts were being directed towards
the nuts with at least two chimpanzees present in the outdoor lab-
oratory. Data collected in 2000 ( oil-palm, coula00, panda) and
2002 (coula02) by D.B. and T.M.

PDF PAGE 8
three species of nuts (oil-palm, panda, coula) at a site and
the target species used in nut-cracking. Of the 12 possibil-
ities for nut-cracking (4 sites × 3 species of nut), in four
cases the behaviour is ecologically impossible (coula and
panda absent at Bossou and Seringbara), while of the re-
maining eight possibilities, five are taken (oil-palm nut-
cracking at Bossou, oil-palm- and coula-cracking at Yeale,
and coula- and panda-cracking at Diecke) and three are
not (oil-palm at Seringbara and Diecke, panda at Yeale).
Hence, it is reasonable to conclude that ecological differ-
ences alone – such as the availability of target items – are
not sufficient to explain why members of some communi-
ties use particular species of nuts as targets for nut-crack-
ing, while others do not. What other determinants are there
for these behavioural differences and how are novel nut-
cracking habits incorporated into and maintained in a
group’s repertoire? We investigated these questions through
focusing in detail on the developmental processes of ac-
quisition.
Development of nut-cracking skill relies 
on individual learning aided by observation
Long-term records have allowed us to highlight various
aspects of the nut-cracking skill, such as a sensitive period
for the acquisition of the motor pattern involved in the ac-
tivity, and the presence of perfect handedness in every in-
dividual. Furthermore, we found that all siblings, apart
from a single exception, exhibited identical handedness in
nut-cracking, while no such patterns were identified between
mothers and their offspring. Instead, all possible combina-
tions in mother-infant comparisons of laterality (left vs right,
right vs left, right vs right, and left vs left) were exhibited.
In addition, both of the non-nut-cracking mothers in the
group produced several offspring who were able to crack
nuts, and the single juvenile who had not fully acquired
the behaviour prior to her disappearance at the age of 7
(although she frequently manipulated both nuts and stones)
had a nut-cracking mother. These observed patterns invite
speculation as to the factors contributing to the develop-
ment of the skill.
Young chimpanzees remain in close proximity of the
mother until the age of 4–5 years, continuing to suckle for
as long as the first 4 years. During this period, the mother’s
behaviour toward her offspring is characterised by high
levels of tolerance. Infants are often seen to take newly-
extracted kernels from the mother’s hand and interact
with the stones used by her for cracking; in fact, such
episodes represent 1-year-old infants’ first steps toward
nut-cracking. Although adults at Bossou do not engage in
direct teaching (cf. two reported cases in Boesch 1991),
they thus provide the setting within which individual
learning occurs, aided by observation. Infants are allowed
to freely explore the nuts, kernels, and stone tools used, as
well as to observe closely each stage of the nut-cracking
process. It is important to note that during this early stage
of learning, the infants are never directly reinforced by
food for their attempts, yet the latter continue for years
before the first kernel is autonomously extracted (Matsu-
zawa et al. 2001). The motivation that drives the infants to
carry on despite the lack of direct reward is a truly in-
triguing issue to consider. Matsuzawa et al. (2001) have
described the process as “Education by master-apprentice-
ship”, and stress that infant chimpanzees are driven not by
a motivation for food but to produce a copy of the mother’s
actions. In this they are both motivated and aided by a strong
affectionate bond with the mother, through her continuing
tolerance toward them. de Waal (2001) coined the term
“Bonding and identification-based observational learn-
ing” (BIOL) to refer to a similar mechanism whereby the
infants’ learning is “born out of the desire to be like oth-
ers” (p 231). These mechanisms thus emphasise a role for
models whom the infants observe and attempt to copy. In
the early years of the infants’ life the mother provides the
most important model for observation, while as the in-
fants grow, they begin more and more to observe other
members of the community as well, including both related
and unrelated individuals within the group (see Hirata and
Celli 2003; Sousa et al. 2003; and Hayashi and Matsu-
zawa 2003, this issue, for studies exploring this topic within
a captive setting).
What roles do these models play in infants’ acquisition
and what information is transmitted from the model to the
observer? Detailed accounts at Bossou of the develop-
mental processes involved in infant chimpanzees’ acquisi-
tion of the nut-cracking skill (Inoue-Nakamura and Mat-
suzawa 1997; Matsuzawa 1994) do not point towards im
i-
tative learning as the underlying mechanism. Young chim-
panzees
go through several stages of manipulating nuts
and stones, first as single objects then in various combi-
nations, and only gradually come to approximate the cor-
rect sequence of actions. Hence, the observed models’
role is likely to lie in providing the observer with infor-
mation about the objects necessary and/or about the out-
come of a successful bout of nut cracking – the former an
example of stimulus or local enhancement, the latter a
more sophisticated “emulation” learning (Tomasello 1996;
see also Whiten and Ham 1992, for a taxonomy of social
learning terms).
Returning to the question of inter-sibling correspon-
dence in laterality, a number of different explanations are
possible. Given the absence of clear patterns in mother-in-
fant laterality, imitation or mirror-image imitation of the
mother are unlikely to be involved. An intriguing possi-
bility is that older siblings themselves make important mod-
els
for observation, however, our data shows that these in-
dividuals are less likely to be observed by their younger
siblings than are mothers or even unrelated members of
the group. We favour an explanation more in line with the
learning mechanisms outlined above: the possibility that
some aspect of the conditions provided by each mother –
under which her infants’ learning takes place – may be
identical in the case of each of her offspring, and encour-
age a particular hand being favoured in the infants’ ham-
mering. (Note that the single individual to exhibit lateral-
ity divergent from his siblings was born to a non-nut-crack-
ing
mother!) Between-mother variation may then account
220

PDF PAGE 9
for the patterns in mother-infant comparisons of laterality.
What features might comprise such relevant aspects of the
setting within which infants’ learning takes place should
be elucidated in the future.
Inter-community transmission through immigration 
and subsequent spread of knowledge: the emergence 
of “cultural zones”
Our field experiments, which introduced to the Bossou group
species of nuts cracked at neighbouring sites but unavail-
able locally, produced some interesting results relevant to
the issue of cultural transmission between chimpanzee
communities. In the case of coula nuts, a female named
Yo stood out from the group as the only individual who
proceeded to crack these nuts from the earliest presenta-
tion, with all the signs of familiarity. This suggested to us
that Yo was an immigrant female, having arrived at
Bossou as an adolescent prior to 1976 from a site such as
neighbouring Yeale, where coula nut-cracking was part of
the community’s cultural repertoire. It is remarkable that
she recognised the nut, presumably unseen for up to 20
years, and immediately set out to crack it without hesita-
tion. It is also interesting that not only Yo, but also other
members of the community who were observed to crack
coula nuts, favoured them to the extent of temporarily
abandoning oil-palm nut-cracking altogether. This was in
spite of the fact that coula nuts are both tougher to break
open (Boesch and Boesch 1983), and that their nutritional
value is lower (energy content per 100 g of kernel of oil-
palm: 663 kcal, coula: 356 kcal; Matsuzawa 1999; Boesch
and Boesch 1983) than oil-palm nuts’. It is possible that
novelty effects in combination with the perception of
coula nuts as a limited resource among the more abundant
oil-palm nuts may have been responsible.
In contrast, panda nuts are intermediate in nutritional
value (407 kcal per 100 g) yet they are the hardest of the
three nuts to crack: Boesch and Boesch (1983) report that
in approximately 90% of cases panda nut-cracking at Tai
Forest is accomplished with the aid of stone rather than
wooden hammers, while the opposite is true for coula nuts
which are predominantly cracked by wooden hammers. In
addition, these authors found that the impulse needed to
crack a single panda nut is approximately three times that
required for coula (when using stone hammer on stone
anvil, as at Bossou). The two Bossou females whom we
observed to crack and taste panda nuts may have aban-
doned their efforts following this first encounter as a re-
sult of having gauged the value of these nuts as low com-
pared to the effort invested and given the alternative nuts
available. Panda nut-cracking did not continue beyond the
first session in the case of adults, and in the case of juve-
niles became sporadic and was soon also abandoned.
The most conspicuous contrast to emerge from our be-
havioural observation during the coula and panda experi-
ments was the absence in the case of panda nuts of a knowl-
edgeable adult, possessing the equivalent of Yo’s apparent
familiarity with coula nuts. This may be accounted for by
the low likelihood of immigration from far-away Diecke,
the nearest site at which panda nut-cracking has so far been
confirmed. The impact that this difference had on the over-
all rates, age-class distribution, and persistence of panda
and coula nut-cracking within the community is perhaps
best explained in terms of the reactions of individuals to
others’ cracking attempts. Aiming to address the question
of how newly-introduced tool-using skills may spread within
the community, we examined social aspects of the chim-
panzees’ responses to the novel nuts.
Our analysis of “observing behaviour” revealed that
individuals were likely to pay close attention to the nut-
cracking efforts of conspecifics in the same age group or
older, but not younger than themselves. It should be noted
that the juvenile as well as the adult group included suc-
cessful crackers of the unfamiliar nuts and would there-
fore have provided similarly numerous, efficient, and
salient models – yet we recorded only a single occasion
where a juvenile was observed by an adult (the mother).
The most general trend that emerged from this analysis
was thus the tendency for chimpanzees to pay attention to
the tool-using activities of conspecifics in their own age
group or older, but not younger.
The contrast between the ways members of the Bossou
community reacted to the two species of novel nuts is of
fundamental relevance to the issue of tool-using traditions
in wild chimpanzee communities. We surmise that in the
presence of a “reliable” model such as an adult keenly en-
gaged in the handling of an unfamiliar object, new behav-
ioural traits such the cracking of novel nuts will spread
rapidly and predictably within a community. On the other
hand, in the absence of such models, hesitant and short-
lived attempts by members of a group are not sufficient to
ensure the quick spread of a behaviour among essentially
neophobic individuals. Our results therefore support the
hypothesis that observational learning plays a pivotal role
in individuals’ acquisition of population-specific behaviours
such as nut-cracking. This is consistent with the “culture”
interpretation, whose key prerequisite it is that a behav-
iour that is shared by members of a community be passed
from generation to generation through non-genetic chan-
nels (Matsuzawa 1999; see also McGrew 1998 for a his-
torical review). If a model’s behaviour indeed facilitates
subsequent attempts in observers, then cultural innova-
tions are likely to spread horizontally (e.g. between unre-
lated juvenile playmates) or vertically/orthogonally down-
wards (e.g. from mother to offspring or from juvenile to
unrelated infant, respectively), but not, in this case, up-
wards. Without the influence of immigrant adults, new
cultural traditions such as the incorporation of novel tar-
gets for tool use are likely to be introduced into chim-
panzee communities by juvenile members of the group,
who appear to be less conservative in their food choice
and more motivated to innovate. These dual aspects of in-
novation and transmission are thus jointly responsible for
the existence of unique behavioural traits within commu-
nities, and the rates at which they take place will in turn
influence the speed with which cultural traditions are as-
similated over time.
221

PDF PAGE 10
Finally, it is important to note that our experiments
dealt not with the introduction of an entirely novel behav-
iour into the community, but the adaptation of an existing
tool-using skill to novel target items. We observed trans-
mission among adult members of the group, who were
well past the end of the sensitive period during which the
motor patterns involved in nut-cracking emerge (despite
the fact that some adults were relatively young due to our
classification based on reproductive age). It is possible that
such generalisation of an existing skill is supported by dif-
ferent learning mechanisms than the acquisition of novel
actions. Precisely which aspects of a behaviour are trans-
mitted before and after the end of the sensitive period re-
main to be elucidated.
Our data thus illuminates both inter-community and
transgenerational aspects of cultural propagation. The three-
way approach we have employed – extensive regional
survey, intensive developmental tracking, and a field ex-
periment introducing novel target items for tool use –
clearly emphasises the role of observational learning both
in introducing and maintaining behavioural traditions in
wild chimpanzee communities. Through immigration, so-
cial transmission, and subsequent “education” through gen-
erations, sets of neighbouring chimpanzee communities can
come to comprise “cultural zones” characterised by the
possession of certain shared behavioural traditions. The
observation that communities that share migrants do not
necessarily possess identical sets of behavioural traditions
further highlights the importance of within-community
propagation following introduction.
Acknowledgements We thank the Direction National de la Re-
cherche Scientifique et Technique, République de Guinée, for
permission to conduct field work at Bossou. The research was sup-
ported by Grants-in-Aid for scientific research from the Ministry
of Education, Science, Sports, and Culture of Japan (grants
07102010, 12002009, 10CE2005, and the 21COE program). We
would like to express our gratitude to the following people who
have been involved in research at Bossou over the years and thus
contributed to the data reported here: Tatyana Humle, Hiroyuki
Takemoto, Satoshi Hirata, and Gaku Ohashi for sharing their data
on the geographical distribution and abundance of the three species
of nuts; and Takao Fushimi, Osamu Sakura, Masako Myowa-Ya-
makoshi, Satoshi Hirata, Maura Celli, Tomomi Ochiai, and Misato
Hayashi for assistance in collecting longitudinal data on laterality
and on the development of nut-cracking in infants. We are also
grateful to Yukimaru Sugiyama who began the study of wild chim-
panzees at Bossou, to Guanou Goumy, Tino Camara, Paquilé
Cherif, and Pascal Goumy for assistance in the field, and to W.C.
McGrew and three anonymous referees for helpful comments on
an earlier version of the manuscript.
References
Baldwin JP, Sabater Pi J, McGrew WC, Tutin CEG (1981) Com-
parisons of nests made by different populations of chimpanzees
(Pan troglodytes). Primates 22:474–486
Boesch C (1991) Teaching among wild chimpanzees. Int J Prima-
tol 41:530–532
Boesch C (1995) Innovation in wild chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes).
Int J Primatol 16:1–16
Boesch C, Boesch H (1983) Optimisation of nut-cracking with nat-
ural hammers by wild chimpanzees. Behaviour 83:265–286
Boesch C, Boesch-Achermann H (2000) The chimpanzees of the
Tai forest: behavioural ecology and evolution. Oxford Univer-
sity Press, Oxford
Boesch C, Marchesi P, Marchesi N, Fruth B, Joulian F (1994) Is
nut-cracking in wild chimpanzees a cultural behavior? J Hum
Evol 26:325–338
Byrne RW, Byrne JME (1993) Complex leaf-gathering skills of
mountain gorillas ( Gorilla g. beringei ): variability and stan-
dardization. Am J Primatol 31:241–261
Goodall J (1964) Tool-using and aimed throwing in a community
of free-living chimpanzees. Nature 201:1264–1266
Goodall J (1986) The chimpanzees of Gombe: patterns of behav-
ior. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mass
Hayashi M, Matsuzawa T (2003) Cognitive development in object
manipulation by infant chimpanzees. Anim Cogn (in press)
Hirata S, Celli ML (2003) Role of mothers in the acquisition of
tool use behaviours by captive infant chimpanzees. Anim Cogn
(in press)
Humle T (2003) Culture and variation in wild chimpanzee behav-
iour: a study of three communities in West Africa. Ph.D. Dis-
sertation, University of Stirling, Stirling
Humle T, Matsuzawa T (2001) Behavioural diversity among the
wild chimpanzee populations of Bossou and neighbouring ar-
eas, Guinea and Cote d’Ivoire, West Africa. Folia Primatol 72:
57–68
Inoue-Nakamura N, Matsuzawa T (1997) Development of stone
tool use by wild chimpanzees ( Pan troglodytes). J Comp Psy-
chol 111:159–173
Kummer H (1971) Primate societies. University of Chicago Press,
Chicago
Matsuzawa T (1991) Nesting cups and metatools in chimpanzees.
Behav Brain Sci 14:570–571
Matsuzawa T (1994) Field experiments on use of stone tools by
chimpanzees in the wild. In: Wrangham R, McGrew W, de
Waal F, Heltne P (eds) Chimpanzee cultures. Harvard Univer-
sity Press, Cambridge, Mass., pp 351–370
Matsuzawa T (1996) Chimpanzee intelligence in nature and cap-
tivity: isomorphism of symbol use and tool use. In: McGrew
WC, Marchant LF, Nishida T (eds) Great ape societies. Cam-
bridge University Press, Cambridge, pp 196–209
Matsuzawa T (1999) Communication and tool-use in chimpanzees:
cultural and social contexts. In: Hauser M, Konishi M (eds)
The design of animal communication. MIT Press, Cambridge,
Mass., pp 645–671
Matsuzawa T, Yamakoshi G (1996) Comparison of chimpanzee
material culture between Bossou and Nimba, West Africa. In:
Russon AE, Bard K, Parker S (eds) Reaching into thought: the
minds of the great apes. Cambridge University Press, Cam-
bridge, pp 211–232
Matsuzawa T, Takemoto H, Hayakawa S, Shimada M (1999)
Diecke forest in Guinea. Pan Afr News 6:10–11
Matsuzawa T, Biro D, Humle T, Inoue-Nakamura N, Tonooka R,
Yamakoshi G (2001) Emergence of culture in wild chim-
panzees: education by master-apprenticeship. In: Matsuzawa T
(ed) Primate origins of human cognition and behavior. Springer,
Tokyo Berlin Heidelberg, pp 557–574
McGrew WC (1992) Chimpanzee material culture: implications
for human evolution. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
McGrew WC (1998) Culture in non-human primates? Annu Rev
Anthropol 27:301–328
McGrew WC, Ham RM, White LJT, Tutin CEG, Fernandez M
(1997) Why don’t chimpanzees in Gabon crack nuts? Int J Pri-
matol 18:353–374
Nishida T (1990) The chimpanzees of the Mahale Mountains: sex-
ual and life history strategies. Tokyo University Press, Tokyo
Sakura O, Matsuzawa T (1991) Flexibility of wild chimpanzee
nut-cracking behavior using stone hammers and anvils: an ex-
perimental analysis. Ethology 87:237–248
Schaik CP van, Ancrenaz M, Borgen G, Galdikas B, Knott CD,
Singleton I, Suzuki A, Utami SS, Merrill M (2003) Orangutan
cultures and the evolution of material culture. Science 299:102–
105
222

PDF PAGE 11
Sousa C, Okamoto S, Matsuzawa T (2003) Behavioural develop-
ment in a matching-to-sample task and token use by an infant
chimpanzee reared by his mother. Anim Cogn (in press)
Sugiyama Y (1981) Observations on the population dynamics and
behavior of wild chimpanzees at Bossou, Guinea, in 1976–
1980. Primates 22:435–444
Sugiyama Y (1984) Population dynamics of wild chimpanzees at
Bossou, Guinea, in 1979–1980. Primates 25:391–400
Sugiyama Y, Koman J (1979) Tool-using and making behavior in
wild chimpanzees at Bossou, Guinea. Primates 20:513–524
Sugiyama Y, Fushimi T, Sakura O, Matsuzawa T (1993) Hand
preference and tool use in wild chimpanzees. Primates 34:151–
159
Tomasello M (1994) The question of chimpanzee culture. In:
Wrangham R, McGrew W, de Waal F, Heltne P (eds) Chim-
panzee cultures. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mass,
pp 301–317
Tomasello M (1996) Do apes ape? In: Heyes CM, Galef BG (eds)
Social learning in animals: the roots of culture. Academic Press,
San Diego, Calif., pp 319–346
Waal FBM de (2001) The ape and the sushi master. Basic Books,
New York
Whiten A, Ham R (1992) On the nature and evolution of imitation
in the animal kingdom: reappraisal of a century of research.
Adv Stud Behav 21:239–283
Whiten A, Goodall J, McGrew WC, Nishida T, Reynolds V, Sugi-
yama Y, Tutin CEG, Wrangham RW, Boesch C (1999) Cul-
tures in chimpanzees. Nature 399:682–685
Yamakoshi G (2001) Ecology of tool use in wild chimpanzees: to-
ward reconstruction of early hominid evolution. In: Matsuzawa
T (ed) Primate origins of human cognition and behavior.
Springer, Tokyo Berlin Heidelberg, pp 537–556
Yamakoshi G, Matsuzawa T (1993) Preliminary surveys of the
chimpanzees in the Nimba Reserve, Cote d’Ivoire (in Japanese
with English summary). Primate Res 9:13–17
223