PDF PAGE 1
© 2010 The Psychonomic Society, Inc. 206
Social learning may be defined as “learnin g that is in-
fluenced by observation of, or interaction with, anothe r 
animal (typically a conspecific) or its products” (Heyes, 
1994; cf. Box, 1984; Galef, 1988). It comprises a variety 
of mechanisms that ran ge in sophistication from co gni-
tively low-level local and stimulus enhancement to high-
level imitation. In the case of local enhancement, an indi-
vidual is more likely to discover a new behavior simply 
bbecause it is drawn to a location at w hich a conspec ific 
is active. Similarly, an object might be more salient to an
individual because a conspecific has been handling it, but
each individual discovers the object’ s affordances for it-
self (e.g., the appropr iate length and diameter o f sticks
to probe for honey or termites). Imitation, generally con-
sidered the most co gnitively demandin g form of social
learning, can be defined as copying the exact form of an
agent’ s actions (Tomasello, 1999). In contrast, emulation 
describes the copying of an action’ s outcome, rather than a
motor pattern. The extent to which human and nonhuman 
animals rely on imitation and emulation to acquire skills
from conspecifics is controversial.
Many experiments have shown that imitation is crucial 
for children who are learnin g tool skills (Call, Carpen -
ter, & Tomasello, 2005; Horner & Whiten, 2005; Want &
Harris, 2001, 2002 ), but nonhuman primates have been
thought mainly to emu late. For example, several studies 
have found no evidence that chimpanzees (Pan troglo-
dytes) or orangutans (Pongo pygmaeus(( ) can copy the ac-
tions of cons pecifics in tasks that re quire tool use to r e-
trieve food (Call & Tomasello, 1994; Myowa-Y amakoshi 
& Matsuzawa, 1999; Nagell, Olguin, & Tomasello, 1993; 
Tomasello, Davis-Dasilva, Camak, & Bard, 1987). How-
ever, Tomasello, Savage-Rumbaugh, and Kru ger (1993) 
found that the imitation abilit y of enculturated chimpan-
zees was similar to that of 2.5-year-old children. Also, a
review of 31 ex periments with apes reported numerous 
cases of both imitative behavior and emulation (Whiten, 
Horner, Litchfield, & Marshall-Pescini, 2004 ). In gen-
 eral, much of the socially learned behavior of nonhuman
primates appears to consist of a combination of different
mechanisms such as imitation, emulation, and stimulus
enhancement, au gmented by individual tr ial-and-error 
learning (Fragaszy & Visalberghi, 1996; Tomasello, 1996;
Whiten, McGuigan, Marshall-Pescini, & Hopper, 2009).
Culture has been defined as soc ially learned behav-
ior patterns that are customary in some communities but 
absent in others, without ecolo gical explanations for the
variation (Laland & Hoppitt, 2003; Whiten et al., 1999). 
 Under this definition, culture has been reported in a wide
range o f an imals an d contexts. Examp les include dia-
lects in son gbirds (Catchpole & Slater, 1995; Marler & 
Tamura, 1964; Mundinger, 1980) and humpback whales 
(Megaptera novaeangliae(( ) (Noad, Cato, Bryden, Jenner, 
& Jenner, 2000; Rendell & Whitehead, 2001), and diverse 
behaviors in nonhuman primates (chimpanzees, McGrew, 
1992; Whiten et al., 1999; orangutans, Pongo pygmaeus, 
van Schaik et al., 2003; capuchin monke ys [Cebus spe-
cies], Ottoni & Izar, 2008; Perry et al., 2003).
Which social learning mechanisms are cruc ial for the
development and transmission of culture? In some cases,
dthe spread of cultural traditions is probably best explained 
by the cognitively simpler mechanisms of local and stimu-
lus enhancement (e.g., potato and grain washing in Japa-
nese macaques; Avital & Ja blonka, 2000; Kawai, 1965).
However, more complex traditions, such as nut crackin g 
fand tool manufacture, mi ght require a hi gher degree of 
Social learning in New Caledonian crows
JENNIFER C. HR OLZHAIDER, GAVIN R. HUNT, AND RUSSELLRR D. GRAY
University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand
New Caledonian (NC) crows are the most sophisticated tool manufacturers other than humans. The diversifi-
cation and geographical distribution of their three Pandanus tool designs that differ in complexity, as well as the 
lack of ecological correlates, suggest that cumulative technological change has taken place. To investigate the 
ppossibility that high-fidelity social transmission mediated this putative ratchet-like process, we studied the ontog-
eny of Pandanus tool manufacture and social organization in free-living NC crows. We found that juvenile crows 
took more than 1 year to reach adult proficiency in their Pandanus tool skills. Although trial-and-error learning 
is clearly important, juveniles have ample opportunity to learn about Pandanus tool manufacture by both observ-
ing their parents and interacting with artifactual material. The crows’ social system seems likely to promote the 
faithful social transmission of local tool designs by both favoring the vertical transmission of tool information 
and minimizing horizontal transmission. We suggest that NC crows develop their Pandanus tool skills in a highly 
scaffolded learning environment that facilitates the cumulative technological evolution of tool designs.
Learning & Behavior
2010, 38 (3), 206-219
doi:10.3758/LB.38.3.206
J. C. Holzhaider, jenny.holzhaider@gmail.com

PDF PAGE 2
SSOCIALOCIAL LEARNINGEARNING ININ NCNC CCROWROWSS 207207
into “ brushes” to improve their efficiency before they are
first used. The authors suggested that the brush probes are
an improvement to an existing, simpler design. However, 
because the brush modification is a sequential addition to
an existing manufacturing process, it is difficult to know 
whether brush manufacturing is transmitted socially or is 
due to individual trial-and-error learning.
Research on the cognition associated with folk physics
and social learning in nonhuman animals has tradition-
ally focused on primates. More recently, however, another 
animal group has received considerable attention in these 
areas of cognitive research: corvids. Corvids have demon-
strated cognitive abilities that rival those of the great apes 
(Bird & Emery, 2009, 2010; Bugnyar, 2008; Emery, 2004;
Emery & Clayton, 2009; Seed, Emery, & Clayton, 2009;
Taylor, Hunt, Holzhaider, & Gray, 2007; Taylor, Hunt, Me-
dina, & Gray, 2009; Taylor, Roberts, Hunt, & Gray, 2009;
Tebbich, Seed, Emery, & Clayton, 2007). Like the brains of 
primates, corvid brains are significantly larger than would 
be predicted from their body size (Jerison, 1973). Impor-
tantly, the relative size of the corvid forebrain, especially
the nidopallium and mesopallium, which are t hought to 
be functionally analogous to t he mamma lian prefrontal 
cortex, is larger than that of most other birds (Mehlhorn, 
Hunt, Gray, Rehkämper, & Güntürkün, 2010; Rehkämper,
Frahm, & Zilles, 1991; Reiner et al., 2004).
Even the lifestyle of many corv id species appears to 
be similar to t hat of nonhuman pr imates. For examp le, 
colonial species such as rooks (Corvus frugilegus) or pin-
yon jays (Gymnorhinus cyanocephalus) live in complex,
variable social groups that are reminiscent of the fission–
fusion societies of chimpanzees (Clayton & Emery, 2007).
Like many primate species, corvids tend to be omniv o-
rous, generalist foragers (Emery, 2006). It has been su g-
gested, therefore, that similar socioecological pressures 
might have led to a convergent evo lution of intelligence 
in corvids and apes (Emery & Clayton, 2004; Seed et al.,
2009).
New Caledonian crows (Corvus moneduloides ,
NC crows hereafter) stand out in the corv id family be-
cause of their exceptional ability to use and manufacture
tools in both the wild (Hunt, 1996, 2000a; Hunt & Gra y, 
2003, 2004a, 2004b, 2007) and the laborator y (Chappell 
& Kacelnik, 2002, 2004; Weir, Cha ppell, & Kacelnik,
2002; Weir & Kace lnik, 2006 ), an d for t heir cons ider-
able problem-solving skills (Taylor et al., 2007; Taylor,
Hunt, e t al., 2009; Taylor et al., 2010; Ta ylor, Roberts,
et al., 2009; Wimpenn y, Weir, Clayton, Rutz, & Kace l-
nik, 2009). NC crows also appear to have relatively large
brains, even among highly encephalized corvids (Cnotka,
Güntürkün, Rehkämper, Gray, & Hunt, 2008; Mehlhorn 
et al., 2010 ). In the wild, NC crows are one of the few 
species that habitually manufacture tools, and the dive r-
sity of tools that they manu facture is matc hed only by
chimpanzees (Whiten et a l., 1999) and orangutans (van
Schaik et al., 2003). Indeed, we believe that the strongest
evidence for human-like cumulative technological evolu-
tion in a nonhuman is provided by NC crows’ manufacture 
of tools from the leaves of Pandanus species trees (Hunt
& Gray, 2003).
fidelity of transmission between individuals (Tomasello, 
Kruger, & Ratner, 1993). Faithful transmission would be
particularly important for incremental improvements in
traditions and artifacts over time (Boserup, 1981; Boyd & 
Richerson, 1996; Tomasello, 2005), because only faithful 
transmission can create a ratchet effect that ensures that 
existing techniques or artifacts are maintained and rel i-
ably reproduced until new improvements appear (Tom a-
sello, Kruger, & Ratner, 1993).
Some aut hors have c laimed t hat on ly very spec ific 
types of social learnin g—namel y, imitative, instructed,
and collaborative learnin g—can lead to cumulative cu l-
tural transmission (Boyd & Richerson, 1996; Tomasello, 
1996). Ot hers have challenged this v iew (Claidière & 
Sperber, 2010; He yes, 1993; La land & Hopp itt, 2003 ).
Claidière and Sperber claimed that imitation mi ght well 
be important for the propagation of animal culture, but it 
is not faithful enough to explain its stability. Heyes (1993) 
argued that fidelity of transmission relies on insulating 
socially transmitted information from individual mod i-
fication, rather than from a particular learnin g process.
Information stored in artifactual material might provide
one o f these insulating processes (“externa l memory,”
Donald, 1991). For example, information about the design
of currently used tools could be obtained from an inspec-
tion of existing tools, as well as from directly observing 
tool manufacturing techniques. Adult chimpanzees, for 
example, frequently allow juveniles to use an d interact
with objects that they had just used as tools (Biro, Sousa,
& Matsuzawa, 2006; Matsuzawa et al., 2001). Laboratory 
experiments have confirmed that the use of tools that were
previously used by an experienced individual can support 
the acquisition of tool skills in naive individuals (Hirata & 
Celli, 2003; Hirata & Morimura, 2000).
Animals commonly modify their environment in a va-
riety o f ways— for examp le, by leaving too ls or facili-
tating access to food sources, t hereby shaping the envi-
ronment in which their offsprin g mature. This process
was termed niche construction by Laland et al. (Laland, 
Odling-Smee, & Fe ldman, 2000; O dling-Smee, La land, 
& Feldman, 2003; Stere lny, 2006) and might lead to the 
faithful transmission of behavior even in the absence of 
high-level social-learning mechanisms, such as imitation 
(Reisman, 2007).
However, despite the many examples of sophisticated 
behavior such as tool use and the associated potential for 
cultural transmission, evidence of cumulative chan ge in
nonhuman animals is exceedin gly rare (Boyd & Riche r-
son, 1996; Whiten, 2005). Song dialects in birds provide a
well-documented example (Baker & Cunningham, 1985; 
Mundinger, 1980).
Chimpanzees exhibit man y aspects of tool use tha t
have been claimed to be uni que to humans, such as the
possession of “too l kits” w ith different too ls for differ-
ent functions (Boesch, Head, & Ro bbins, 2009 ), or t he
use of tools for underground food extraction (Hernandez-
Aguilar, Moore, & Pickering, 2007; Sanz, Morgan, & Gu-
lick, 2004). Sanz, Call, and Morgan (2009) recently docu-
mented that chimpanzee populations in the Congo Basin 
deliberately modify the tips of their termite-fishing probes 

PDF PAGE 3
208208 HOLZOLZHAIDER, H,H UNTUNT,, ANDAND GGRA Y
shapes of over 5,000 counterparts at 21 sites across main-
land Grande Terre and the island of Maré, Hunt and Gray
(2003) showed that each tool design is characterized by a 
high degree of local standardization. The specific design 
made at a s ite (e.g., a two-steppe d tool) can rema in the
same for decades (G. R. Hunt, unpublished data ), sug-
gesting hi gh-fidelit y transmission. Furthermore, Hunt 
and Gray found different geographical distributions of the 
three-tool designs without any obvious ecological corre-
lates. The geographical distribution patterns and absence 
of the recapitulation of simpler designs when making the 
more complex, stepped design led Hunt and Gray to sug-
gest that diversification of Pandanus tools arose through 
a process of cumulative technological evolution, probably
mediated by social learning.
Is there any evidence that social learning is involved in 
the acquisition of tool skills in NC crows? A first attempt 
to unravel the mechanisms involved in the ontogeny of tool
use in juvenile crows was undertaken at the University of 
Oxford. Kenward, Rutz, Weir, and Kacelnik (2006) hand 
raised four NC crows in artificial nests and provided them 
with sticks and food that could be extracted only by using 
the sticks as tools (Kenward et al., 2006). Food retrieval was
preceded by precursor actions that resembled components
of proficient tool use, and all four juveniles retrieved food 
at approximately 70 days of age. T wo of the four juvenile
crows were allowed to watch tool use by their human foster 
parents, resulting in increased twig carrying and insertion 
rates. However, the tutoring did not influence the onset or 
proficiency of food extraction, indicating that social input 
might not be necessary to acquire proficiency in basic stick 
tool use. Development of basic tool use in the absence of 
social input is also seen in other bird species that habitu -
ally use tools in the wild. Woodpecker finches (Cactospiza 
pallida) have shown prefunctional development of tool be-
havior and acquired proficient stick tool use, regardless of 
whether they were expose d to a too l-using model (Teb-
bich, Taborsky, Fessl, & Blomqvist, 2001). Similarly, naive
Egyptian vultures (Neophron percnopterus(( ) developed the 
technique of throwing stones to break eggs without social
input (Thouless, Fanshawe, & Bertram, 1989). However, in
the Kenward et al. (2006) study, the tutored crows also had 
a preference to handle objects that had been manipulated 
by the experimenters, indicating that stimulus enhanc e-
NC crows manufacture two types of tools (Hunt, 1996): 
stick tools (Hunt & Gray, 2002) and tools made from the 
barbed edges of Pandanus species leaves (Hunt & Gray,
2003, 2004b). Stick tools can be made by simple modifi-
cations to tw igs and similar stick-like materials, or by a
much more com plicated process to create hooked tools
from fresh twigs (Hunt, 1996; Hunt & Gray, 2004a). The 
latter process first involves discarding one side of a forked 
twig and then breaking off the remaining side just below 
the base of the fork. The crow then usuall y removes the 
leaves from the twi g and sculpts a hook from the short 
stump on the wide end of the tool (Figure 1).
Pandanus tools are manufactured to three different de-
signs: uniformly wide, uniformly narrow, and stepped or 
tapered (Hunt & Gray, 2003) (Figure 2). The crows use the
naturally occurring barbs along one edge of these tools to
hook prey such as slugs and insects out of Pandanus spe-
cies and other trees. Stepped tools have the most complex
shape and combine the advanta ges of the other two de -
signs. Stepped tools, like narrow tools, are thin and flex -
ible at the probing end, but like wide tools are sturdy and 
easy to gr ip at t he proximal end that is held in the bill.
Importantly, the design of a part icular Pandanus tool is
determined before or at the start of manufacture, and a 
tool is functional only after the final cut that separates i t
from a leaf. Therefore, unlike tools made by other species,
such as chimpanzees’ brush tools, Pandanus tools cannot
be made and used in a series of incremental functional 
steps, leadin g Hunt (2000a) to su ggest that the shape
of steppe d tools is determined by a ru le system before 
manufacture begins. After removal, an exact negative tem-
plate, the counterpart, rema ins on t he leaf edge, making 
it possible to reconstruct the shapes of tools made at a 
site over several years (Hunt, 2000a). By documenting the
Figure 1. Manufacture of a hooked-twig tool. A crow breaks off 
and discards the side twig (breakI) before snapping the tool-twig
off the stem just below the junction (brea k II). It then usually 
removes the leaves on the tool-twig and sculpts the hook. From
“The Crafting of Hook Tools by Wild New Caledonian Crows,”
by G. R. Hunt and R. D. Gray, 2004, Proceedings of the Royal So-
ciety B, 271, p. 89. Copyright 2004 by the Royal Society. Adapted
with permission.
A
B
C
Figure 2. The three different Pandanus tool designs described 
on Grande Terre. (A) Wide tool. (B) Narrow tool. (C) Stepped
tool.

PDF PAGE 4
SSOCIALOCIAL LEARNINGEARNING ININ NCNC CCROWROWSS 209209
ficient at ant dipping than adults (Humle, 2006; Nishida
& Hiraiwa, 1982).
Although research on hand-raised animals in the labo-
ratory enables observations under controlled conditions,
such research cannot model all of the processes that might
lead to the development of complex behaviors in the wild.
Only a field stud y can full y investigate the interactions
between parents and offspring that might facilitate social
learning (see, e.g., Jaeggi et al., 2010).
Determining the extent o f any soc ial learning associ-
ated with tool manufacture and use in NC crows requires
insight into their social organization and the extent of their 
parental care, as we ll as into the ontogeny o f their tool 
skills. Social organization is of interest because it can re-
veal possible pathways of social transmission.
Early observations of NC crows have su ggested tha t
they live most often in small family groups (Hunt, 2000b;
Kenward, Rutz, Weir, Chappell, & Kacelnik, 2004). Hunt
(2000b) o bserved a nutr itionally independent juvenile 
moving around with adults and su ggested that the 30 o r 
more crows he observed in a tree at the Sarraméa site 
on Grande Terre were a temporary aggregat ion of small
groups. Kenward et al. (2004) saw NC crows flying above
the canopy on Grande Terre in groups that were typically 
composed of three to four individuals, and the y captured 
crows in small mixed-sex groups, which is consistent with 
the hypothesis that NC crows live most frequently in small
family groups.
In the following account, we will describe the results of an 
extended field study conducted between 2003 and 2008 on
the island of Maré, where NC crows habitually manufacture
only uniformly wide Pandanus tools. The study focused on
both the social organization of NC crows and the ontogeny
of Pandanus tool skills in juvenile crows (Holzhaider, Hunt, 
& Gray, 2010; Holzhaider et al., in press). We found that 
the social organization of NC crows is suitable for enabling 
the cumulative technological evolution suggested by Hunt
and Gray (2003), and that different forms of learning—both 
social and individual—ma y be involved in the development
of wide-Pandanus-tool manufacture in juvenile crows.
METHOD
The study site was approximately 1.5 km2 of primary and second-
ary rain forest that was 5-km inland from Wabao village, where we 
had individually color banded over 100 crows between 2003 an d 
2006. Forest areas are interspersed with garden patches in which 
local villagers grow fruit and vegetables. These gardens, in which
there are still many dead trees, are usually used for 2 consecutive 
years before they become overgrown. Crows forage in both forest 
and garden patches.
Our main method of studying free-living NC crows at t he site 
was to observe them at feeding tables that were set up either in the
forest or in garden patches (Figure 3). The tables, made from wood 
found in the vicinity, were situated about 1 m above the ground and 
were provided with fresh papaya (Carica papaya) to attract crows. 
Observations were made from hides that were set up around 5–7 m 
from the tables. Whenever possible, we videotaped observations 
with either a handheld video camera or a camera that was operate d 
remotely by a mot ion detector. To observe Pandanus tool manu-
facture, we positioned a fresh Pandanus species tree at t he table.
To provide naturalistic tool manufacture opportunities, the tree was 
ment might play a role in the acquisition of certain aspects
of tool manufacture and use.
Several weeks after developing stick tool use, the fou r 
crows were each presented with artificially mounted Pan-
danus leaves. Each crow ripped at the leaves and removed 
strips of material from them. One 3-month-old crow man-
ufactured a leaf strip and used it as a probe on its first day
of exposure to the leaf (Kenward, Weir, Rutz, & Kacelnik, 
2005). Kenward et al. (2005) and Kenward et al. (2006) 
therefore conc luded that basic too l use an d basic Pan-
danus tool manufacture can develop from a disposition 
to manipulate tool-like material to tr y and obtain out-of-
reach food, without social input. They cautioned, however,
that social learning might play a role in the acquisition of 
“ specific techniques and tool shapes.”
Observations of a hand-raised male N C crow at Parc
Zoo-Forestier, Nouméa, confirmed that basic stick tool
skills can develop without social learning (Hunt, Lambert,
& Gray, 2007). This crow also tore off pieces of provided 
Pandanus species leaves, but did not use them as tools.
Similarly, when four captive adult crows that probabl y
lacked ex perience w ith Pandanus s pecies leaves were
given the opportunity to use an d manufacture Pandanus
tools, only two of them probed with the provided tools, and 
none manufactured tools. Hunt et al. proposed that a dis-
position for basic stick tool skills evolved early in the his-
tory of the NC crow’ s tool behavior. With this disposition 
in place, crows then enhanced their stick tool skills and 
developed Pandanus tool skills through individual and so-
cial learning. Interestingly, although the five young, naive 
crows at Nouméa and the University of Oxford laboratory
ripped strips of material off Pandanus species leaves that 
could be used to extract meat, none of these leaf tools re-
sembled any of the threePandanus tool designs described 
in the wild. The lack of shape consistency with the tools
made in the wild might have been due to a lack of prac-
tice, or possibly to impoverished living conditions. Adult
crows that are held captive in our own outdoor aviary on
Maré also sometimes indiscriminatel y tear at the leaves 
on Pandanus species trees that are provided in their cages 
without using most of the removed material as tools.
Another surprisin g aspect of Kenward e t al.’ s (2005) 
and Kenward et al.’ s (2006) studies was the short perio d 
of time in which the naive hand-raised juveniles learne d 
to use an d manu facture too ls. All four juveniles were
less than 3 months old when they successfully extracted 
meat with sticks, and by 3 months of age, one subject had 
manufactured Pandanus tools and used them to extrac t
meat. This rapid skill acquisition clearly contrasts with the 
ontogeny of tool use in young primates, both human and 
nonhuman. For example, children require man y months
to successfully use a spoon to eat (Connolly & Dalgleish,
1989), and even longer to accomplish more sophisticated 
tasks. Y oung chimpanzees at Bossou in Guinea, as we ll 
as tufted capuc hins (Cebus ape lla) in Braz il, take well 
over 2 years to learn to crack nuts (de Resende, Ottoni, & 
Fragaszy, 2008; Inoue-Nakamura & Matsuzawa, 1997 ).
Chimpanzees do not reach adult proficiency at nut crack-
ing until they are 9 to 10 years old (Matsuzawa, 1994).
Similarly, by 6 years of age chimpanzees are still less ef-ff

PDF PAGE 5
210210 HOLZOLZHAIDER, H,H UNTUNT,, ANDAND GGRA Y
location of Pandanustool manufacture (in the tree) from the location 
of Pandanus tool use (on the table). This separation probably caused 
juveniles to remain on the table to wait for food extraction while
their parents made tools in the nearby tree. This spatial separation 
of tool manufacture and use may have reduced the frequency with 
which juveniles watched parents manufacture tools.
RESULTSLL AND DISCUSSION
Development of Wide Pandanus
Tool Manufacture
To describe the ontogeny of wide Pandanus tool manu-
facture and use, we documented all tool-related behavior 
of six juvenile crows between the ages of 2 and 18 months 
that regularly visited our feeding tables. We defined five
behavioral categories to describe tool-manufacture tech -
niques, ranging from unsuccessful, random-like ripping 
at leaves to adult-like tool manufacture, and four catego-
ries to describe different stages o f tool-use proficiency. 
We also recorded all tool use and manufacture events
by accompanying parents, and whether or not juveniles 
appeared to watch the activities of their parents. Parent–
juvenile relationships were identified by parental feeding, 
intensive juvenile begging toward an adult, and protracted 
following of an adult by a juvenile.
In contrast with th e results of Kenward et al. (2005) 
and Kenward et al. (2006), we found that the development
of proficient Pandanus tool manufacture and use in the 
wild is a very extended process that is comparable to the
ontogeny of tool skills in both human and nonhuman pri-
mates. Our findings also suggest that social learning plays
an important role in that development.
Before acquiring adult-like technical proficiency at 10 
to 12 months of a ge, juveniles went through four differ-
ent stages of nonproficient Pandanus tool manufacture 
(Figures 4 and 5): In Stage I, the first attempts to manufac-
ture Pandanus tools consisted of uncoordinated ripping
of Pandanus species leaves that often failed to produce
a tool. If juveniles successfully removed a tool, it usually
did not resemble the classic shape of an adult-made wide 
tool, or it lacked barbs because it was removed at unsuit-
able locations for manufacture. In Stage II, the production 
of adult-like wide tools with a well-coordinated sequence
of cutting and ripping actions developed gradually. J u-
veniles’ use of adult-like cutting and ripping actions still 
did not a lways result in the removal of a functional tool
from the leaf because they made errors in the position of 
a cut or a rip. Adults generally position the second cut/rip
action distal to the first one, and both cuts have the same
depth. They can therefore remove the tool easily from the 
leaf and hold it in a functional orientation (i.e., with the 
leaf-edge barbs facin g away from the workin g end). In
contrast, juveniles sometimes placed the second cut/rip
proximal to the first one. This resulted in the tools being
held with the barbs facing toward the working end, which 
rendered them nonfunctional (Figure 5, Technique 3). Ad-
ditionally, cut/rip actions may have been of uneven depth 
and the tool could not be removed from the leaf (Figure 5, 
Technique 2). In Stage III, juveniles reac hed adult-like
technical skill in wide-tool manufacture, carrying out the 
generally left in its original state except for the trimming of leaves 
that overhung the table. To create standardized opportunities for tool 
use, we drilled holes (ca. 2.5 cm in diameter and ca. 7cm deep) into
dead logs that were placed on the tables. These holes were baite d 
with pieces of meat that crows could extract only using tools.
It has been suggested that our approach of observing crows from
hides at artificial feeding sites prohibits the collection of behavioral
data in a naturalistic setting (Bluff, Troscianko, Weir, Kacelnik, & 
Rutz, 2010; Rutz, B luff, Weir, & Kacelnik, 2007). However, field 
experiments manipulating the environment of study individuals have
a long-standing tradition in animal research (Reader & Biro, 2010).
For example, valuable insights into the ontogeny of chimpanzee nut-
cracking behavior have been obtained using a methodology similar 
to ours (Inoue-Nakamura & Matsuzawa, 1997; Matsuzawa, 1994).
Although our met hods were not su itable to stu dy natura l sites of 
Pandanus and stick tool use, we believe they were appropriate for 
studying naturalistic Pandanus tool manufacture, since conditions 
in Pandanus trees in the forest away from feeding sites are not dif -ff
ferent from those at our tables. Furthermore, by standardizing the 
characteristics of probe sites, we could compare the proficiency of 
tool use between individuals. Our observations did not disturb the
crows’ daily routines or interfere with their family relationships. 
We therefore believe that our observations are generally indicative
of NC crows’ behavior in the wild. A recent study investigating NC 
crows’ stick tool use at natural foraging sites on Grande Terre (Bluff 
eta l., 2010) confirmed the ecological validity of our approach. Bluff 
eta l. reported findings similar to those we have obtained at our feed-
ing tables (Holzhaider et al., 2010) regarding juveniles’ opportunity
to use discarded tools and to observe parental tool use. There are, 
however, two possible limitations of our methodology. First, because
the tables provided a continuous, valuable food source, they were
probably more sa lient to crows t han natural feeding sites, such as 
Pandanus species trees in the forest or papaya trees in gardens. Con-
sequently, crows might be attracted to the tables, bringing them into 
closer contact w ith conspecifics than would be the case at natura l 
feeding sites. Secon d, our o bservations on Maré su ggest that the 
manufacture and the use of a Pandanus tool usually occur in close 
proximity to one another in the same tree, whereas we separated the 
Figure 3. Example of a feedin g table at the Maré stud y site. 
We used fresh papaya on the tables to attract crows. A Pandanus
tree is attached behind the table to provide the opportunity for 
naturalistic tool manufacture. The log on the table is baited with
meat placed in drilled holes to allow tool use under standardized 
conditions.

PDF PAGE 6
SSOCIALOCIAL LEARNINGEARNING ININ NCNC CCROWROWSS 211
1. Juveniles followed their parents almost constantl y,
and up to 40% o f their time at feeding tables was in the 
company of at least one parent. Parents t herefore likely
helped to initiate tool-related behaviors via local enhance-
ment, leading their offspring to Pandanus trees to forage.
2. Y oung crows were fed a considerable amount of the
food that their parents had extracted, and scrounging from
parents was frequently tolerated. Because the young crows 
were generally not rewarded by their own probing attempts
until they were 6 months of age, parental feeding probably 
kept them motivated to use and manufacture tools. More-
over, the opportunity to scrounge from conspecifics can 
facilitate social learnin g in birds and primates (Caldwell
& Whiten, 2003; Midford, Hailman, & Woolfenden, 2000; 
but see Giraldeau & Lefebvre, 1987).
3. The first tools that juveniles used were those dropped 
or discarded by their parents or other experienced crows.
Juveniles up to 6 months of age commonly took advantage
of these ready-made tools even after they started to make 
their own tools (Figure 6). Given the close proximity of 
juveniles to t heir parents during their first 6 months of 
life, tools that the y picked up were much more likel y to 
be parental tools than those made b y other crows. Like
scrounging of food, the use of tools that were formerly
used or manu factured by exper ienced conspec ifics is
likely to ass ist the development of proficient tool use in 
inexperienced individuals (Hirata & Celli, 2003; Hirata & 
Morimura, 2000).
By providing a juvenile’ s early tools, NC crow parents 
might also influence the emergence of juveniles’ tool pref-ff
erences via stimulus enhancement. Most adult crows have
a strong, if not exclusive, preference to manufacture and 
correct sequence of manufacture ste ps. Complete adult-
like proficiency, however, was reached only in Stage IV, in 
the second year of life, when juveniles’ speed of manufac-
ture matched that of adults. For video clips of the differ -
ent stages of tool manufacture, see Video 2 in Holzhaider 
et al. (2010).
Proficient too l-using tec hniques develop faster t han 
tool-making techniques, taking approximately 7 months, 
because juveniles have ready access to tools that are di s-
carded by adults. However, like Pandanus tool manufac-
ture, proficient tool use is also preceded by a per iod of 
faulty tool use. Incorrect Pandanus tool use includes the 
faulty insertion of tools into holes or the use of too much 
force when probin g so that tools are nonfunctional b e-
cause they bend in the holes. Similar to what occurs in 
Pandanus tool manufacture, juveniles do not reach adult 
meat extraction speeds until at least 12 months of age.
Social Learning in NC Crows
One important mec hanism by which juvenile crows 
learn to manufacture and use Pandanus tools appears to 
be individual trial-and-error learnin g. All of the juvenile
crows that we observed spent considerable amounts of 
time ripping at Pandanus leaves without producing a
functional tool and probing holes with unsuitable tools
without extract ing meat. Juven iles pers isted with these
behaviors often when alone on the tables. However, their 
learning took place in an environment that was stron gly 
scaffolded by t heir parents in severa l ways. T he first
6 months posthatching appear to be especially important
for the acquisition of tool skills, with the followin g be-
haviors observed predominantly during this period:
0
20
40
60
80
100
0–3 4–6 7–9 10–12 13–15 16+ Parents
Average Frequency of Manufacture Technique (%)Age (Months Post Hatching)
Technique 0 (random rips, no tool removed)
Technique 1 (random rips, tool removed)
Technique 2 (coordinated, nonaligning rips, no tool removed)
Technique 3 (coordinated rips in wrong order, barbs toward working tip)
Technique 4 (adult-like tool manufacture)
N =12 80 102 208 33 421
Figure 4. Development of wide Pandanus tool manufacture techniques. N  the total number of tools
manufactured by the members of each age class.

PDF PAGE 7
212 HOLZOLZHAIDER, H,H UNTUNT,, ANDAND GGRA Y
results s how that juveniles appeare d to watc h too l use
(i.e., probing and meat extraction ) much more than the y 
watched tool manufacture. However, as we cautioned ear-
lier, this difference might be an art ifact of the artificial 
spatial separation of the locations of tool manufacture and 
subsequent tool use at feedin g tables. In Pandanus trees 
away from feedin g tables, the manufacture and use of a 
wide Pandanus tool generally occurs in close proximity,
in the same tree. Therefore, a juvenile watching a parent 
extracting prey in a Pandanus tree probably also had the 
opportunity to watch tool manufacture.
A detailed analysis of tool manufacture in two fami -
lies revealed that crows on Maré manufacture Pandanus
tools using slightly different manu facture var iants (see
Figure 8; for video clips of the variants, see Vide o 3 in 
Holzhaider et al., 2010 ). Although juveniles did not d i-
rectly adopt their respective parents’ preferred variant, the 
distribution of variants was more similar within the two
families than between them (Figure 9). This is consistent 
with the juveniles’ copying one of the variants that the y
saw their parents use. However, the differences between
the three variants are su btle and our sam ple size of two 
use either stick or Pandanus tools (Hunt & Gray, 2007). 
In our present study, all of the juveniles that developed a
preference for Pandanus tools (4 out of 5 juveniles—i.e.,
80%) had at least one parent w ith the same pre ference.
Moreover, two juveniles of a pair in which both partners
preferred to use stick tools also developed a preference for 
stick tools (Holzhaider, Hunt, & Gray, unpublished data).
4. Counter parts create d on Pandanus species leaves
from tool manufacture appear to facilitate the early devel-
opment of juvenile tool manufacture by providing easily 
accessible “startin g points” for manufacture, similar to
the way that juvenile black rats (Rattus rattus(( ) can learn to
remove pine cone seeds (Terkel, 1996). Until 6 months of 
age, juveniles often started tool manufacture at counte r-
parts or other dama ged sections of leaf ed ge (Figure 7). 
Therefore, counterparts might help juveniles to learn the
appropriate location along the leaf edge at which to make
a tool, and the correct depth of a rip.
5. Juveniles have ample opportunity to observe close up 
both tool manufacture and tool use. Parents are extremely
tolerant toward their offspring, allowing body contact and 
even the touching of their tools by juveniles’ bills. Our 
Figure 5. Four distinct stages in the development of juvenile crows’ wide Pandanus
tool manufacture to adult tools. In Stage I (Techniques 0 and 1), juveniles rip at leaves 
in an uncoordinated fashion that does not normall y result in a functional tool. No 
tool is produced in Technique 0. The removed leaf section at left for Technique 1 was 
used as a tool. The leaf section at right for Technique 1 shows multiple uncoordinated 
ripping; the arrows indicate the two-leaf pieces that were used as tools. In Stage II, ju-
veniles use coordinated cutting and ripping sequences but their actions usually either 
do not produce a tool (Technique 2) or produce tools that are removed from the leaf 
in the wrong orientation (i.e., with the leaf-edge barbs pointing toward the working
tip; Technique 3). In Stage III (Technique 4), juveniles produce adult-like tools but 
are still slower at manufacture than adults. Adult-like tool manufacture is reached in
Stage IV . Because Techniques 0 and 2 do not result in a tool being removed from the 
leaf, we show the section of the leaf where tool manufacture had been attempted. The 
scale indicates centimeters.

PDF PAGE 8
SSOCIALOCIAL LEARNINGEARNING ININ NCNC CCROWROWSS 213213
of the locally produced tool design and use this as a basis
for their own tool manufacture. In this way, the wide, nar-
row, and stepped Pandanus tool desi gns could be faith -
fully transmitted between generations even in the absence
of imitation. Template matching is a well-described pro-
cess in songbirds (Doupe & Konishi, 1991; Konishi, 1985;
Nottebohm, 1984). During a sensitive period, young birds
hear and memorize a tutor song. By practicing themselves, 
they then gradually match their own song to t he memo-
rized temp late. T his mec hanism ena bles song birds to
faithfully transmit local song dialects (Mundinger, 1980).
A similar process of template matching might occur in the
families was very small. Therefore, we cannot exclude the 
possibility that the correspondence of variants within the 
two families was due to chance. With a larger sample size
of families, a possible method to test for nonrandomness
in the frequency of variants that crows use was discussed 
by Kendal and colleagues (Kendal et al., 2010; Kendal, 
Kendal, Hoppitt, & Laland, 2009).
An alternative mechanism mediatin g the transmission 
of too l-design information m ight be through “externa l 
memory” (Donald, 1991) via artifactual material, without 
the need for directly observing manufacture. By using pa-
rental tools, juvenile crows might form a mental template 
0
20
40
60
80
100
2–3 4–6 7–9 10–12 13–15 16+
Mean Frequency of Tool Source (%)
Age (Months Post Hatching)
19 132 128 161 35
Parents’ tools Other tools Own tools
Figure6. Origin of Pandanus tools used at tables. Numbers on top of bars give the total number of tools per 
age class. Note that “ other tools”  might also include tools manufactured by parents at earlier visits.
0
20
40
60
80
100
2–3 4–6 7–9 10–12 13–15 16+ Parents
Mean Frequency of Tool Manufacture (%)
Age (Months Post Hatching)
10 95 100 202 57 324
At CP At other damaged parts of the leaf At intact leaf
Figure 7. Average frequency of Pandanus tool manufacture starting at counterparts (CP) or other
damaged parts of the leaf. Numbers on top of the bars give the total number of tool manufactures per 
age class.

PDF PAGE 9
214 HOLZOLZHAIDER, H,H UNTUNT,, ANDAND GGRA Y
To assess the crows’ social-network size, we recorded 
the number of famil y and nonfamily members that adult 
males from our tar get families tolerated at the tables in
any 1 year.
Family structure. We found that, as in other corv id 
species, breeding pairs of NC crows live year round in sta-
ble, monogamous, potentially lifelong relationships. The
female usually incubates and broods the eggs, whereas 
both partners feed the juveniles before and after fledging.
On a social scale, however, NC crows are at the lower end 
of corvid socialit y. For example, rooks can nest within 
colonies of hundreds of pairs and ma y assemble in wi n-
ter roosts of tens of thousands of individuals (Clayton &
Emery, 2007). Pinyon jays live in permanent flocks of 50 
to 500 individuals (Balda & Bateman, 1971; Marz luff & 
Balda, 1989). In the highly social Mexican jay ( Aphelo(( -
coma ultramarine), two adult pairs typically share a ter -
ritory with numerous non breeding helpers, all of whom 
participate in feeding the juveniles and defending the ter-
ritory (Clayton & Emer y, 2007). In contrast, NC crows’
core social unit is the immediate famil y, consisting of a
mated pair and their offspring from up to 2 consecutive
years. These findings confirm early observations on wild 
NC crows by Hunt (2000b) and Kenward et al. (2004).
Juveniles dela y dispersal for up to 2 0 months (Fig-
ure 10) and may be fed by both parents throughout this
time, except during the breeding season following their 
fledging. We found no indication of communal breeding
or helpers at the nest, and we have not observed any birds
other than parents feeding juveniles.
Social network size . Because feeding ta bles were
highly desirable food sources, any bird on a ta ble was 
likely to be perceived as a competitor for food. Food shar-
development of NC crow tool manufacture, with juveniles 
gradually adjusting the shape of their own tools to the de-
sign manufactured by their parents.
The Social Structure of NC Crows
To describe NC crows’ social system, we used two ap-
proaches. To assess the crows’ famil y structure, we ana-
lyzed all observations of individuals of nine target fam i-
lies both at an d away from ta bles. We then determined 
on how many observation days partners were seen w ith 
each other and how frequently juveniles and their parents
were observed together. We also documented the breeding 
behavior of four breeding pairs and the extent of parental
care (in particular, parental feeding) postfledging.
Figure 8. V ariants of Pandanus tool manufacture. V ariant A:
Two cut–r ip sequences converge about hal fway along the tool.
Variant B: A cut–r ip (1) is followed by a cut (2). Variant C: A
cut (1) is followed by a cut–r ip (2).
0
20
40
60
80
100
Male Juvenile Female Male Juvenile 1 Juvenile 2
Family 1 Family 2
Frequency of Variant (%)
145 222 67 94 55 36
Variant A Variant B Variant C
Figure 9. V ariants of adult-like tool manufacture in two crow families. Note that the juveniles of Family 2 hatched in 2 con-
secutive years; they spent only limited time at the tables to gether. Sample sizes for the number of tools manufactured are 
above bars.

PDF PAGE 10
SSOCIALOCIAL LEARNINGEARNING ININ NCNC CCROWROWSS 215215
Hunt and Gray (2003) suggested that complex, stepped 
Pandanus tools evolved throu gh cumulative improv e-
ments to the simpler wide-tool design. That is, the stepped 
design was selected because of its superior properties as a 
tool (a stiff holding end combined with a narrow, flexible
probing end). The absence of simpler tools in most areas 
where the stepped design is found and the wide distrib u-
tion of the stepped design, as compared with the narrow
and wide design, are consistent with this theory. An im-
portant requirement for this scenario is the faithful trans-
mission of tool designs.
Social transmission within a population may generally
be either vertical (from parent to offspring) or horizontal
(between unrelated individuals) (Cavalli-Sforza & Feld-
man, 1981; but see Allison, 1992; Bo yd & Richerson,
1985; Findlay, Hansell, & Lumsden, 1989, for more d e-
tailed definitions). Individual improvements to techniques 
are unlikely to become established if there is a strong pos-
sibility of horizontal transmission (Sterelny, 2006). This 
is because horizontal transmission would provide a mu l-
titude of different variations to choose from, “dilutin g”
improvements made by parents. Vertical transmission is
therefore considered to be crucial to create a ratchet effect 
to maintain individual improvements that are not infl u-
enced by horizontal transmission (Sterelny, 2006).
The social organization of NC crows on Maré is likely 
to facilitate vert ical transm ission while minimizing the 
opportunity for horizontal transmission. First, the crows 
ing has been suggested to p lay an important ro le in the
development of social bonds in corvids, such as jack-
daws (Corvus monedula) (von Bayern, de Kort, Clayton,
& Emery, 2007) and rooks (Emery, Seed, von Bayern, &
Clayton, 2007). Similarly, many primate species generally
share food onl y with individuals with whom the y have
established social relationships (de Waal, 1989; Stevens & 
Gilby, 2004). A conspecific tolerated on a table would be 
expected to be individually “ known” to a target animal.
Target males predominantly shared tables with immedi-
ate family (i.e., partner and/or juveniles; Figure 11) and 
tolerated an avera ge of 9 different nonfamil y crows on 
tables during the course of the study. They tolerated more 
different nonfamily juveniles (mean of 6 different individ-
uals per male) than different nonfamily adults (mean of 3 
different individuals per male). The reason for the greater 
tolerance of nonfamily juveniles might be that they com-
monly display submissively when near a nonfamily adult 
and are therefore less of a potential threat. Consequently, 
adult males mi ght tolerate nonfamil y juveniles withou t
having had previous interactions with them.
Implications for Understanding Tool Behavior by
Crows on Grande Terre
Can the aforementioned findings on crow sociality and 
the development of wide tool manufacture on Maré hel p 
explain the existence and geographical distribution of dif-ff
ferent Pandanus tool designs on mainland Grande Terre? 
20
40
60
80
100
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
1st Year 2nd Year
Mean Percentage of Bird Observation Days
2.4 12 13.5 9.2 10.7 2.2 12 11.4 11.2 10.4 11.6 3 3.3 11.8 11 5.8 10.7 1.3 16 8.3 5.5 5 9 12N1 =
N2 = 566666396777444433132111
Figure 10. Observations of juveniles traveling with their parents. Juveniles travel with their parents during the first 2 years of their 
lives. The y-axis gives the mean percentage of bird observation days/month on which juveniles were seen with one or both parents.
N1NN  mean bird observation days/month (maximum of 1 observation per juvenile per day); N2NN number of juveniles observed in each
month. Black bars, percentage of days observed with parents; white bars, percentage of days observed without parents.

PDF PAGE 11
216216 HOLZOLZHAIDER, H,H UNTUNT,, ANDAND GGRA Y
they did at earlier ages, they are unlikely to adopt different
strategies used by unrelated crows since they have already
settled on a manufacture variant.
Could the social behavior of the crows on Maré enable 
high-fidelity transmission of tool information? Theoret i-
cally, yes. Close proximity between individuals increases
the likelihood that one can observe details of the other’s 
behavior (Coussi-Korbel & Fragaszy, 1995). Van Schaik,
Deaner, and Merrill (1999) claimed that stron g mutual 
tolerance between individuals was a key factor in the evo-
lution of technology among hominids and was facilitated 
by a lifestyle involving food sharing and tool-based pro-
cessing of food.
Our methodology does not allow us to distin guish be-
tween possible observational learning mechanisms such
as imitation or emulation. However, young crows clearly 
have ample opportun ity to watc h tool manufacture an d 
tool use closely, and to use artifactual material produced 
by their parents. Our results also strongly indicate that 
trial and error p lays a central role in the development of 
juvenile too l manu facture an d use. Tr ial and error has 
also been suggested to be important in children’ s obtain-
ing significant knowled ge about the ph ysical properties
of their tools (Lockman, 2000). Nevertheless, as Kenward 
et al. (2005) pointed out, an important role for trial-and-
error learning does not exclude the possibility that either 
children or NC crows learn important details about manu-
facture techniques and tool shape culturally. Such social 
learning might either be a result of direct observation or 
possibly be acquired less directly via “externa l memory” 
located in artifactual material, such as tools and counter -
parts produced by adults.
Conclusion
Different kinds of social learnin g may play a si gnifi-
cant role in NC crows’ development of tool manufacture
and use. Both the social organization of NC crows and the 
clearly prefer to interact with family members and only 
rarely share rich food sources (like feeding tables and, pre-
sumably, Pandanus trees away from tables) with nonfam-
ily individuals. When sharing a feeding table with family 
members, 1st-year juveniles are much more likel y to be 
in the company of their parents than with older siblings.
Of the over 300 visits to tables by 1st-year juveniles with 
at least one parent, older siblings were present on only 18
occasions. Although juveniles also shared tables with non-
family crows, and target males appeared to be more toler-
ant of nonfamily juveniles than of adults, the opportunity
for 1st-year crows to learn tool skills from their parents 
(vertical transmission) was much greater than the oppor-
tunity to learn from nonfamily birds (horizontal transmis-
sion, as defined previously). This is because juveniles that 
shared a ta ble with their parents o ften approached them 
very closely when they were engaged in tool use, some-
times even touching the tool as the parent was probing. In
contrast, we never observed a juvenile getting this close to 
an unrelated adult while using or manufacturing Pandanus
tools. Instead, juveniles tended to keep their distance and 
often displayed submissively. Furthermore, visits in which 
juveniles shared a table with an unrelated adult were less
frequent and tended to be much briefer than visits with 
family members.
The extended close association between juveniles and 
parents also makes it more likel y that juveniles will o b-
serve their parents’ tool manufacture, and it increases the 
chance of their using their parents’ tools or starting manu-
facture at counterparts t he parents have produced, rather 
than interactin g with artifactual material produced b y 
other birds. Moreover, the developmental pattern of tool 
manufacture indicates that the most important period for 
acquiring tool manufacture skills is within the first 3 to 6 
months of life. Thereafter, tool manufacturing techniques 
are largely adult like (Figure 4). Although juveniles spend 
less time with their parents from 6 to 9 months of age than 
0
20
40
60
80
100
Jan Feb Sept Oct Nov Dec
Percentage of Visits
N1 =1 6 62
N2 = 345533562563
62 114 97 108 17 87 170 8 70 155
Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug
None Family only Family + others Others only
Figure 11. Tolerance of other birds by 6 target males at feeding tables. Family members are more fre-
quently tolerated than nonfamily members.N1NN  total number of visits by all 6 target males;N2NN  number 
of target males observed in each month.

PDF PAGE 12
SSOCIALOCIAL LEARNINGEARNING ININ NCNC CCROWROWSS 217217
ative tool modification b y captive nontool-using rooks. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences, 106, 10370-10375.
Bird, C. D., & Emery, N. J. (2010). Rooks perceive support relations
similar to six-month-old babies. Proceedings of the Royal Society B,
277, 147-151.
Biro, D., Sousa, C., & Matsuzawa, T. (2006). Ontogeny and cultural
propagation of tool use by wild chimpanzees at Bossou, Guinea: Case 
studies in nut cracking and leaf folding. In T. Matsuzawa, M. To-
monaga, & M. Tanaka (Eds.), Cognitive development in chimpanzees
(pp. 476-508). Tokyo: Springer.
Bluff, L. A., Troscianko, J., Weir, A. A. S., Kacelnik, A., & Rutz, C.
(2010). Tool use b y wild New Caledonian crows Corvus moned u-
loides at natural foraging sites. Proceedings of the Royal Society B ,
277, 1377-1385.
Boesch, C., Head, J., & Robbins , M. M. (2009). Complex tool sets 
for honey extraction among chimpanzees in Loango National Park, 
Gabon. Journal of Human Evolution, 56, 560-569.
Boserup, E. (1981). Population and technolo gical change: A study of 
long-term trends. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Box, H. O . (1984). Primate behaviour and social ecolo gy. London: 
Chapman & Hall.
Boyd, R., & Richerson, P. J.(1985). Culture and the evolutionary pro-
cess. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Boyd, R., & Richerson, P. J. (1996). Why culture is common, but cul-
tural evolution is rare. Proceedings of the British Academy, 88, 77-93.
Bugnyar, T. (2008). Animal cognition: Rooks team up to solve a prob-
lem. Current Biology, 18, R530-R532.
Caldwell, C. A., & Whiten, A. (2003). Scrounging facilitates social 
learning in common marmosets, Callithrix jacchus. Animal Behav-
iour, 65, 1085-1092.
Call, J., Carpenter, M., & Tomasello, M. (2005). Copying results
and copying actions in the process of social learnin g: Chimpanzees 
(Pan troglodytes(( ) and human children (Homo sapiens(( ). Animal Cogni-
tion, 8, 151-163.
Call, J., & Tomasello, M. (1994). The social learning of tool use b y 
orangutans (Pongo pygmaeus(( ). Human Evolution, 9, 297-313.
Catchpole, C. K. , & Slater , P. J. B. (1995). Bird song: Biological 
themes and variations. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Cavalli-Sforza, L. L., & Feldman, M. W. (1981). Cultural transmis-
sion and evolution: A quantitative approach. Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press.
Chappell, J., & Kacelnik, A. (2002). Tool selectivity in a non-primate,
the New Caledonian crow (Corvus moneduloides). Animal Cognition,
5, 71-78.
Chappell, J., & Kacelnik , A. (2004). Selection of tool diameter b y 
New Caledonian crows (Corvus moneduloides ). Animal Cognition,
7, 121-127.
Claidière, N., & Sperber , D. (2010). Imitation explains the propa -
gation, not the stability of animal culture. Proceedings of the Roya l 
Society B, 277, 651-659.
Clayton, N. S., & Emery, N. J. (2007). The social life of corvids.Cur-rr
rent Biology, 17, R652-R656.
Cnotka, J., Güntürkün, O., Rehkämper, G., Gray, R. D., & Hunt,
G. R. (2008). Extraordinary large brains in tool-using New Caledonian
crows (Corvus moneduloides). Neuroscience Letters, 433, 241-245.
Connolly, K., & Dalgleish, M. (1989). The emergence of a tool-using 
skill in infancy.Developmental Psychology, 25, 894-912.
Coussi-Korbel, S., & Fragaszy , D. M. (1995). On the relation b e-
tween social dynamics and social learning. Animal Behaviour , 50,
1441-1453.
de Resende, B. D. , Ottoni, E. B. , & Fragaszy, D. M. (2008). On-
togeny of manipulative behavior and nut-cracking in young tufte d 
capuchin monkeys (Cebus apella): A perception–action perspective.
Developmental Science, 11, 828-840.
de Waal, F. B. M. (1989). Food sharin g and reciprocal obli gations
among chimpanzees. Journal of Human Evolution, 18, 433-459.
Donald, M. (1991). Origins of the modern mind: Three stages in the
evolution o f culture and co gnition. Cambrid ge, MA: Harvard Uni -
versity Press.
Doupe, A. J., & Konishi, M. (1991). Song-selective auditory circuits 
in the vocal control system of the zebra finch. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 88, 11339-11343.
Emery, N. J. (2004). Are corvids “feathered apes”?: Cognitive evolution
way that tool skills develop have the capacity to facilitate 
faithful transmission of tool designs by encouraging verti-
cal transmission and minimizing horizontal transmission. 
However, several questions remain about the development 
and geographical distribution of different Pandanus tool 
designs on New Caledonia’ s mainland, Grande Terre. For 
example, we know nothing about the ontogeny of stepped 
Pandanus tool manufacture and use.
Our observations on Maré suggest t hat soc ial learn-
ing may be involved in t he development o f w ide too l
manufacture. However, wide tools are relativel y simple 
to manufacture. The stron g parallel fibers o f Pandanus 
species leaves facilitate the production of uniformly wide
strips of material. As Kenward et al. (2005) showed, naive
crows can produce rough strips of Pandanus leaf that are 
suitable for meat extraction, without social input.
Although it is possible that naive juveniles can develop
adult-like wide tool manufacture by individual trial-and-
error learning alone, it is difficult to imagine that the more 
complicated stepped tools are produced in this wa y. We
also do not know whether an individual crow can produce
more than one Pandanus tool design or whether stepped 
tools are really more efficient in extracting prey than the 
simpler wide and narrow designs. Controlled experiments 
are also needed to further investi gate the possibilit y of 
information transmission via template matching.
Finally, the social organization of NC crows on Maré
that is based around small family groups and the delayed 
dispersal of juveniles is likely to be comparable to that of 
crows on Grande Terre. However, we know little abou t
the factors surrounding juvenile dispersal from the fam-
ily unit. Investigating this aspect of the NC crows’ social 
system is important because dispersal dynamics have im-
plications for the spread and geographical distribution of 
tool designs (Lind & Lindenfors, 2010).
AUAA THOR NOTE
We thank William Wadrobert for kindl y allowing us to work on his 
family’ s land in Wabao District, Maré, and the Province des Iles Loyauté 
for permission to work on Maré. Mick Sible y prepared DVD versions 
of the video footage. Noel Andrews, Lindsey Davidson, Roland Rehm, 
Robert Ross, Mick Sibley, and Alex Taylor assisted with data collection.
We thank Katie Palmer for help with the coding of video footage, Puja 
Singh for help with the coding and processing of the sociality data, Viv-
ian Ward for drawing Figure 3, and Roland Rehm for the production of 
Figure 5. Jeff Galef provided many helpful comments that improved the
manuscript. This research was funded by a grant from the New Zealand 
Marsden Fund (awarded to R.D.G. and G.R.H.). The research reported 
in this article was approved by the University of Auckland Animal Ethics
Committee (approvals R231 and R375) and complies with the laws of 
New Caledonia. Address correspondence to J . C. Holzhaider, Depart -
ment of Psychology, University of Auckland, Private Bag 92019, Auck-
land 1142, New Zealand (e-mail: jenny.holzhaider@gmail.com).
RERR FERERR NCES
Allison, P. D. (1992). Cultural relatedness under oblique and horizontal
transmission rules. Ethology & Sociobiology, 13, 153-169.
Avital, E., & Jablonka , E. (2000). Animal traditions: Behavioural 
inheritance in evolution. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Baker, M. C., & Cunningham, M. A.(1985). The biology of bird-song 
dialects. Behavioral & Brain Sciences, 8, 85-133.
Balda, R. P., & Bateman, G. C. (1971). Flocking and annual cycle of 
the piñon jay, Gymnorhinus cyanocephalus. Condor, 73, 287-302.
Bird, C. D., & Emery, N. J. (2009). Insightful problem solving and cre-

PDF PAGE 13
218218 HOLZOLZHAIDER, H,H UNTUNT,, ANDAND GGRA Y
tool manufacture and use b y a New Caledonian crow (Corvus mon-
eduloides). Animal Cognition, 7, 114-120.
Hunt, G. R. , & Gray, R. D. (2007). Parallel tool industries in New 
Caledonian crows. Biology Letters, 3, 173-175.
Hunt, G. R., Lambert, C., & Gray, R. D. (2007). Cognitive require-
ments for tool use b y New Caledonian crows. New Zealand Journal 
of Zoology, 34, 1-7.
Inoue-Nakamura , N. , & Matsuzawa , T. (1997). Development o f 
stone tool use by wild chimpanzees ( Pan troglodyte s). Journal o f 
Comparative Psychology, 111, 159-173.
Jaeggi, A. V ., Dunkel, L. P., Van Noordwijk, M. A., Wich, S. A., 
Sura, A. A. L., & Van Schaik, C. P. (2010). Social learning of diet 
and foraging skills by wild immature Bornean orangutans: Implica -
tions for culture. American Journal of Primatology, 72, 62-71.
Jerison, H. J. (1973). Evolution of the brain and intelligence. New York: 
Academic Press.
Kawai, M. (1965). Newly-acquired pre-cultural behavior of the natural 
troop of Japanese monkeys on Koshima islet. Primates, 6, 1-30.
Kendal, R. L. , Custance, D. M. , Kendal, J. R. , Vale, G., Stoin-
ski, T. S., Rakotomalala , N. L. , & Rasamimanana , H. (2010). 
Evidence for social learning in wild lemurs ( Lemur catta(( ). Learning 
& Behavior, 38, 220-234.
Kendal, R. L., Kendal, J. R., Hoppitt, W., & Laland, K. N. (2009). 
Identifying social learning in animal populations: A new “option-bias” 
method. PLoS ONE, 4, e6541. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0006541
Kenward, B., Rutz, C., Weir, A. A. S., Chappell, J., & Kacelnik, A. 
(2004). Morphology and sexual dimorphism of the New Caledonian
Crow Corvus moneduloides, with notes on its behaviour and ecology.
Ibis, 146, 652-660.
Kenward, B., Rutz, C., Weir, A. A. S., & Kacelnik, A.(2006). Devel-
opment of tool use in New Caledonian crows: Inherited action patterns 
and social influences. Animal Behaviour, 72, 1329-1343.
Kenward, B., Weir, A. A. S., Rutz, C., & Kacelnik, A. (2005). Be-
havioural ecology: Tool manufacture by naive juvenile crows. Nature,
433, 121.
Konishi, M. (1985). Birdsong: From behavior to neuron.Annual Review 
of Neuroscience, 8, 125-170.
Laland, K. N., & Hoppitt, W.(2003). Do animals have culture?Evolu-
tionary Anthropology: Issues, News, & Reviews, 12, 150-159.
Laland, K. N., Odling-Smee, J., & Feldman, M. W. (2000). Niche
construction, biological evolution, and cultural change. Behavioral & 
Brain Sciences, 23, 131-146.
Lind, J., & Lindenfors , P. (2010). The number of cultural traits is 
correlated with female group size but not with male group size in
chimpanzee communities. PLoS ONE, 5, e9241. doi:10.1371/journal
.pone.0009241
Lockman, J. J. (2000). A perception–action perspective on tool use d e-
velopment. Child Development, 71, 137-144.
Marler, P., & Tamura, M. (1964). Culturally transmitted patterns of 
vocal behavior in sparrows. Science, 146, 1483-1486.
Marzluff, J. M., & Balda, R. P. (1989). Causes and consequences of 
female-biased dispersal in a flock-living bird, the Pinyon Jay.Ecology,
70, 316-328.
Matsuzawa, T. (1994). Field experiments on use of stone tool by chim-
panzees in the wild. In R. W . Wran gham, W . C. McGrew, F .B. M. 
de Waal, & P . Heltne (Eds.), Chimpanzee culture s (pp. 351-370). 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Matsuzawa, T., Biro, D., Humle, T., Inoue-Nakamura, N., To-
nooka, R., & Yamakoshi, G. (2001). Emergence of culture in wil d 
chimpanzees: Education by master-apprenticeship. In T. Matsuzawa 
(Ed.), Primate origins of human cognition and behavior  (pp.r 557-
574). Tokyo: Springer.
McGrew, W. C. (1992). Chimpanzee material culture: Implications for 
human evolution. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Mehlhorn , J. , Hunt , G. R. , Gray , R. D. , Rehkämper , G. , & 
Güntürkün, O. (2010). Tool-making New Caledonian crows have
large associative brain areas.Brain, Behavior & Evolution, 75, 63-70.
Midford, P. E., Hailman, J. P., & Woolfenden, G. E. (2000). Social 
learning of a novel foraging patch in families of free-living Florida
scrub-jays. Animal Behaviour, 59, 1199-1207.
Mundinger, P. C. (1980). Animal cultures and a general theory of cul-
tural evolution. Ethology & Sociobiology, 1, 183-223.
in crows, jays, rooks and jackdaws. In S. Watanabe (Ed.), Comparative 
analysis of mind (pp.d 181-213). Tokyo: Keio University Press.
Emery, N. J. (2006). Cognitive ornithology: The evolution of avian in-
telligence. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, 361, 
23-43.
Emery, N. J., & Clayton, N. S. (2004). The mentality of crows: Con-
vergent evolution of intelligence in corvids and apes. Science, 306,
1903-1907.
Emery, N. J., & Clayton, N. S. (2009). Tool use and physical cognition
in birds and mammals. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 19, 27-33.
Emery, N. J., Seed, A. M., von Bayern, A. M. P., & Clayton, N. S.
(2007). Cognitive adaptations of social bonding in birds. Philosophi-
cal Transactions of the Royal Society B, 362, 489-505.
Findlay, C. S. , Hansell, R. I. C. , & Lumsden, C. J. (1989). Behav-
ioral evolution and biocultural games: Oblique and horizontal cultural
transmission. Journal of Theoretical Biology, 137, 245-269.
Fragaszy, D. M., & Visalberghi, E. (1996). Social learning in mon -
keys: Primate “primacy” reconsidered. In C. M. Heyes & B. G. Galef,
Jr. (Eds.), Social learning in animals: The roots of culture (pp. 65-84).
San Diego: Academic Press.
Galef, B. G., Jr. (1988). Imitation in animals: History, definition, and 
interpretation of data from the psychological laboratory. In T . R.
Zentall & B. G. Galef, Jr. (Eds.), Social learning: Psychological and
biological perspectives (pp. 3-28). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Giraldeau, L.-A., & Lefebvre , L. (1987). Scrounging prevents cul-
tural transmission of food-findin g behaviour in pigeons. Animal Be-
haviour, 35, 387-394.
Hernandez-Aguilar, R. A., Moore, J., & Pickering , T. R. (2007). 
Savanna chimpanzees use tools to harvest the underground storage 
organs of plants. Proceedings of the National Academ y of Sciences,
104, 19210-19213.
Heyes, C. M. (1993). Imitation, culture and co gnition. Animal Behav-
iour, 46, 999-1010.
Heyes, C. M. (1994). Social learning in animals: Categories and mecha-
nisms. Biological Reviews, 69, 207-231.
Hirata, S., & Celli, M. L. (2003). Role of mothers in the acquisition
of tool-use behaviours by captive infant chimpanzees. Animal Cogni-
tion, 6, 235-244.
Hirata, S., & Morimura, N. (2000). Naive chimpanzees’ (Pan troglo(( -
dytes) observation of experienced conspecifics in a tool-usin g task. 
Journal of Comparative Psychology, 114, 291-296.
Holzhaider, J. C., Hunt, G. R., & Gray, R. D. (2010). The develop-
ment of Pandanus tool manufacture in wild New Caledonian crows.
Behaviour, 147, 553-586.
Holzhaider, J. C., Sibley, M. D., Taylor, A. H., Singh, P. J., Gray, 
R.D ., & Hunt, G. R. (in press). The social structure of New Caledo-
nian crows. Animal Behaviour.
Horner, V., & Whiten, A. (2005). Causal knowled ge and imitation /
emulation switching in chimpanzees ( Pan troglodytes) and children
(Homo sapiens(( ). Animal Cognition, 8, 164-181.
Humle, T. (2006). Ant dippin g in chimpanzees: An example of how 
microecological variables, tool use, and culture reflect the cogn i-
tive abilities of chimpanzees. In T. Matsuzawa, M. Tomonaga, &
M. Tanaka (Eds.), Cognitive development in chimpanzees (pp. 4 52-
475). Tokyo: Springer.
Hunt, G. R. (1996). Manufacture and use of hook-tools by New Cale -
donian crows. Nature, 379, 249-251.
Hunt, G. R. (2000a). Human-like, population-level specialization in
the manufacture of Pandanus tools by New Caledonian crows Corvus
moneduloides. Proceedings of the Royal Society B, 267, 403-413.
Hunt, G. R. (2000b). Tool use b y the New Caledonian crow Corvus 
moneduloides to obtain Cerambycidae from dead wood. Emu, 100, 
109-114.
Hunt, G. R., & Gray, R. D.(2002). Species-wide manufacture of stick-
type tools by New Caledonian Crows. Emu, 102, 349-353.
Hunt, G. R. , & Gray, R. D. (2003). Diversification and cumulative
evolution in New Caledonian crow tool manufacture. Proceedings of 
the Royal Society B, 270, 867-874.
Hunt, G. R. , & Gray, R. D. (2004a). The crafting of hook tools by 
wild New Caledonian crows.Proceedings of the Royal Society B, 271,
88-90.
Hunt, G. R., & Gray, R. D. (2004b). Direct observations of Pandanus-

PDF PAGE 14
SSOCIALOCIAL LEARNINGEARNING ININ NCNC CCROWROWSS 219219
Tebbich, S., Seed, A. M. , Emery, N. J. , & Clayton , N. S. (2007). 
Non-tool-using rooks, Corvus frugilegus, solve the trap-tube problem. 
Animal Cognition, 10, 225-231.
Tebbich, S., Taborsky, M., Fessl, B., & Blomqvist , D. (2001). Do
woodpecker finches acquire tool-use by social learning?Proceedings
of the Royal Society B, 268, 2189-2193.
Terkel, J. (1996). Cultural transmission of feeding behavior in the black 
rat (Rattus rattus(( ). In C. M. Heyes & B. G. Galef, Jr. (Eds.),Social learn-
ing in animals: The roots of culture (pp. 17-47). San Diego: Academic 
Press.
Thouless, C. R., Fanshawe, J. H., & Bertram, B. C. R. (1989). Egyp-
tian vultures Neophron percnopterus and ostrich Struthio camelus
eggs: The origins of stone throwing behavior. Ibis, 131, 9-15.
Tomasello, M. (1996). Do apes ape? In C. M. Heyes & B. G. Galef, Jr. 
(Eds.), Social learning in animals: The roots of culture(pp. 319-346).
London: Academic Press.
Tomasello, M. (1999). The human adaptation for culture. Annual Re-
view of Anthropology, 28, 509-529.
Tomasello , M. (2005). Uniquely human cognition is a product o f 
human culture. In S. C. Levinson & P . Jaisson (Eds.), Evolution and 
culture: A Fyssen Foundation symposium (pp. 203-218). Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Tomasello, M., Davis-Dasilva, M., Camak, L., & Bard, K. (1987). 
Observational learning of tool-use by young chimpanzees. Human
Evolution, 2, 175-183.
Tomasello, M., Kruger, A. C., & Ratner , H. H. (1993). Cultural
learning. Behavioral & Brain Sciences, 16, 495-552.
Tomasello, M., Savage-Rumbaugh, S., & Kruger, A. C.(1993). Imi-
tative learning of actions on objects by children, chimpanzees, an d 
enculturated chimpanzees. Child Development, 64, 1688-1705.
van Schaik, C. P., Ancrenaz, M., Borgen, G., Galdikas, B., Knott,
C. D., Singleton, I., et al. (2003). Orangutan cultures and the evo-
lution of material culture. Science, 299, 102-105.
van Schaik, C. P., Deaner, R. O., & Merrill, M. Y . (1999). The condi-
tions for tool use in primates: Implications for the evolution of mate-
rial culture. Journal of Human Evolution, 36, 719-741.
von Bayern, A. M. P., de Kort, S. R., Clayton, N. S., & Emery, N. J.
(2007). The role of food- and ob ject-sharing in the development o f 
social bonds in juvenile jackdaws ( Corvus monedula ). Behaviour,
144, 711-733.
Want, S. C., & Harris, P. L. (2001). Learning from other people’ s mis-
takes: Causal understanding in learning to use a tool. Child Develop-
ment, 72, 431-443.
Want, S. C., & Harris, P. L. (2002). How do children ape? Appl ying
concepts from the study of non-human primates to the developmental
study of “imitation” in children. Developmental Science, 5, 1-14.
Weir, A. A. S., Chappell, J., & Kacelnik, A. (2002). Shaping of hooks
in New Caledonian crows. Science, 297, 981.
Weir, A. A. S., & Kacelnik, A. (2006). A New Caledonian crow (Cor-rr
vus moneduloides) creatively re-designs tools by bending or unbend-
ing aluminium strips. Animal Cognition, 9, 317-334.
Whiten, A. (2005). The second inheritance system of chimpanzees and 
humans. Nature, 437, 52-55.
Whiten, A., Goodall, J., McGrew, W. C., Nishida, T., Reynolds, V.,
Sugiyama, Y., et al. (1999). Cultures in chimpanzees. Nature, 399,
682-685.
Whiten, A., Horner, V., Litchfield, C. A., & Marshall-Pescini, S.
(2004). How do apes ape? Learning & Behavior, 32, 36-52.
Whiten, A., McGuigan, N., Marshall-Pescini, S., & Hopper, L. M.
(2009). Emulation, imitation, over-imitation and the scope of culture
for child and chim panzee. Philosophical Transactions o f the Ro yal 
Society B, 364, 2417-2428.
Wimpenny, J. H., Weir, A. A. S., Clayton, L., Rutz, C., & Kacel-
nik, A. (2009). Cognitive processes associated with sequential tool
use in New Caledonian crows. PLoS ONE, 4, e6471.
(Manuscript received March 8, 2010;
revision accepted for publication April 30, 2010.)
Myowa-Yamakoshi, M., & Matsuzawa, T.(1999). Factors influencing 
imitation of manipulatory actions in chimpanzees ( Pan troglodytes(( ).
Journal of Comparative Psychology, 113, 128-136.
Nagell, K., Olguin, R. S. , & Tomasello , M. (1993). Processes of 
social learning in the tool use of chimpanzees ( Pan troglodytes(( ) and 
human children (Homo sapiens(( ). Journal of Comparative Psychology,
107, 174-186.
Nishida, T., & Hiraiwa, M. (1982). Natural history of a tool-using be-
havior by wild chimpanzees in feeding upon wood-boring ants.Jour-rr
nal of Human Evolution, 11, 73-99.
Noad, M. J., Cato, D. H., Bryden, M. M., Jenner, M.-N., & Jenner,
K. C. S. (2000). Cultural revolution in whale son gs. Nature, 408, 
537.
Nottebohm, F. (1984). Birdsong as a model in which to study brain 
processes related to learning. Condor, 86, 227-236.
Odling-Smee, F. J., Laland, K. N., & Feldman, M. W.(2003). Niche 
construction: The neglected process in evolutio n. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Ottoni, E. B., & Izar, P. (2008). Capuchin monkey tool use: Overview 
and implications. Evolutionary Anthropology: Issues, News, & R e-
views, 17, 171-178.
Perry, S. , Panger , M. , Rose , L. M. , Baker , M. , Gros-Louis , J., 
Jack, K., et al. (2003). Traditions in wild white-faced capuchin 
monkeys. In D. M. Fragaszy & S. Perry (Eds.), The biology of tradi-
tions: Models and evidence (pp. 391-425). Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Reader, S. M., & Biro, D. (2010). Experimental identification of social
learning in wild animals. Learning & Behavior, 38, 265-283.
Rehkämper, G., Frahm, H. D., & Zilles, K. (1991). Quantitative de-
velopment of brain and brain structures in birds (galliformes and pas-
seriformes) compared to that in mammals (insectivores and primates).
Brain, Behavior & Evolution, 37, 125-143.
Reiner, A., Perkel, D. J., Bruce, L. L., Bulter, A. B., Csillag, A.,
Kuenzel, W., et al. (2004). Revised nomenclature for avian te l-
encephalon and some related brainstem nuclei. Journal of Compara-
tive Neurology, 473, 377-414.
Reisman, K. (2007). Is culture inherited throu gh social learnin g? Bio-
logical Theory, 2, 300-306.
Rendell, L., & Whitehe ad, H. (2001). Culture in whales and dol-
phins. Behavioral & Brain Sciences, 24, 309-382.
Rutz, C., Bluff, L. A., Weir, A. A. S., & Kacelnik, A. (2007). Video 
cameras on wild birds. Science, 318, 765.
Sanz, C. , Call , J. , & Morgan , D. (2009). Design complexity in
termite-fishing tools of chimpanzees ( Pan troglodytes(( ). Biology Let-
ters, 5, 293-296.
Sanz, C., Morgan, D., & Gulick, S. (2004). New insights into chim-
panzees, tools, and termites from the Congo basin.American Natural-
ist, 164, 567-581.
Seed, A., Emery, N., & Clayton, N. (2009). Intelligence in corvids and 
apes: A case of convergent evolution? Ethology, 115, 401-420.
Sterelny, K. (2006). The evolution and evolvability of culture. Mind & 
Language, 21, 137-165.
Stevens, J. R., & Gilby, I. C.(2004). A conceptual framework for nonkin 
food sharing: Timing and currency of benefits.Animal Behaviour, 67, 
603-614.
Taylor, A. H., Hunt, G. R., Holzhaider, J. C., & Gray, R. D. (2007). 
Spontaneous metatool use by New Caledonian crows. Current Biol-
ogy, 17, 1504-1507.
Taylor, A. H., Hunt, G. R., Medina, F. S., & Gray, R. D. (2009). Do
New Caledonian crows solve physical problems through causal re a-
soning? Proceedings of the Royal Society B, 276, 247-254.
Taylor, A. H., Medina, F. S., Holzhaider, J. C., Hearne, L. J., Hunt, 
G.R ., & Gray, R. D. (2010). An investigation into the cognition be-
hind spontaneous string pulling in New Caledonian crows. PLoS 
ONE, 5, e9345.
Taylor, A. H., Roberts, R., Hunt, G. R., & Gray, R. D. (2009). Causal 
reasoning in New Caledonian crows: Ruling out spatial analogies and 
sampling error. Communicative & Integrative Biology, 2, 311-312.