PDF PAGE 1
Older, sociable capuchins ( Cebus capucinus ) invent
more social behaviors, but younger monkeys
innovate more in other contexts
Susan E. Perry a,b,1, Brendan J. Barrett c,d, and Irene Godoy e
aDepartment of Anthropology, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1553; bBehavior, Evolution and Culture Program, University of California, Los
Angeles, CA 90095-1553; cAnimal Behavior Graduate Group, University of California, Davis, CA 95616-8522; dDepartment of Anthropology, University of
California, Davis, CA 95616-8522; and eBehavioural Science Institute, Radboud University Nijmegen, 6500 HE Nijmegen, The Netherlands
Edited by Andrew Whiten, University of St. Andrews, St. Andrews, United Kingdom, and accepted by Editorial Board Member Andrew G. Clark May 16, 2017
(received for review January 18, 2017)
An important extension to our understanding of evolutionary
processes has been the discovery of the roles that individual and
social learning play in creating recurring phenotypes on which
selection can act. Cultural change occurs chiefly through invention
of new behavioral variants combined with social transmission of
the novel behaviors to new practitioners. Therefore, understand-
ing what makes some individuals more likely to innovate and/or
transmit new behaviors is critical for creating realistic models of
culture change. The difficulty in identifying what behaviors qualify
as new in wild animal populations has inhibited researchers from
understanding the characteristics of behavioral innovations and
innovators. Here, we present the findings of a long-term, system-
atic study of innovation (10 y, 10 groups, and 234 individuals) in
wild capuchin monkeys ( Cebus capucinus ) in Lomas Barbudal,
Costa Rica. Our methodology explicitly seeks novel behaviors, re-
quiring their absence during the first 5 y of the study to qualify as
novel in the second 5 y of the study. Only about 20% of 187 inno-
vations identified were retained in innovators’ individual behavioral
repertoires, and 22% were subsequently seen in other group mem-
bers. Older, more social monkeys were more likely to invent new
forms of social interaction, whereas younger monkeys were more
likely to innovate in other behavioral domains (foraging, investiga-
tive, and self-directed behaviors). Sex and rank had little effect on
innovative tendencies. Relative to apes, capuchins devote more of
their innovations repertoire to investigative behaviors and social
bonding behaviors and less to foraging and comfort behaviors.
innovation | Cebus capucinus | cultural evolution | phenotypic plasticity |
learning
B
ehavioral innovation has long been a topic of interest for
researchers dedicated to studying the evolution of culture,
because it is a driver of cultural change (1, 2). The types of be-
havioral traditions that are of greatest interest to evolutionary
modelers are those starting with an innovation that then spreads
via social learning. Understanding the characteristics of ( i) be-
havioral innovations (which are roughly analogous to genetic
mutations) and ( ii) the individuals who invent these behaviors is
critical to understanding cultural evolution and its relationship to
genetic evolution. Innovation is also of interest to evolutionary
biologists who study the role that learning plays in macroevolu-
tion, because it is a type of phenotypic plasticity that can affect
the direction of natural selection (3). Ability to innovate can
enhance reproductive success (for example, by enabling indi-
viduals to exploit new resources) (4 –6). Innovation can generate
the Baldwin effect, in which learned traits create recurring
phenotypes that select for morphological adaptations, eventually
leading to speciation (3, 7). Innovation is also of interest as a
correlate of intelligence more generally, and the ability to solve
novel cognitive problems presented by experimenters can be
positively associated with mating success [e.g., bowerbirds (8)]
and parenting success [e.g., great tits (9)] in wild populations.
Despite the obvious theoretical importance of innovation as a
key element in cultural evolution, there are relatively few studies
of this topic, particularly in wild populations, because of meth-
odological difficulties in stimulating innovation experimentally
or detecting innovations in observational studies (10). This
paucity of information is partly because of the difficulty in cre-
ating operational definitions of innovation that can produce
meaningful datasets for comparative analysis. Here, we loosely
adopt the definitions by Reader and Laland (11) of innovation
(the process) as “a process that results in new or modified
learned behaviour and that introduces novel behavioural variants
into a population ’s repertoire ” and innovation (the product) as
“a new or modified learned behavior not previously found in the
population” (ref. 11, p.14). Following the definitions of Ramsey
et al. (12) and van Schaik et al. (13), we emphasize that inno-
vations are not part of the innate repertoire and do not arise
predictably in all population members at certain points in the life
history; also, they do not predictably emerge in all population
members in response to particular social or ecological condi-
tions. The definition by Ramsey et al. (12) and van Schaik et al.
(13) differs from the definition by Reader and Laland (11), be-
cause it focuses on the individual rather than the population [i.e.,
Ramsey et al. (12) argue that multiple individuals within the
same population could independently create the same behavior].
We take a compromise position, counting a behavior as an in-
novation if this is the first time that the behavior has been seen in
a particular social group during the putative innovator ’s lifetime.
Operational definitions of innovation and invention differ greatly
across fields. Some define innovations as inventions that have
subsequently spread throughout the population via social learning
(14). We use the definition most commonly and currently used in
the animal behavior literature, in which transmission of a new
behavior is not a necessary part of our definition of innovation.
We assume because of the extreme xenophobia exhibited by
white-faced capuchins (15) that widespread social transmission
This paper results from the Arthur M. Sackler Colloquium of the National Academy of
Sciences, “The Extension of Biology Through Culture, ” held November 16–17, 2016, at the
Arnold and Mabel Beckman Center of the National Academies of Sciences and Engineering
in Irvine, CA. The complete program and video recordings of most presentations are available
on the NAS website at www.nasonline.org/Extension_of_Biology_Through_Culture.
Author contributions: S.E.P. designed research; S.E.P., B.J.B., and I.G. performed research;
S.E.P., B.J.B., and I.G. analyzed data; and S.E.P., B.J.B., and I.G. wrote the paper.
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission. A.W. is a guest editor invited by the Editorial
Board.
Data deposition: The R-code and data used in the statistical analysis reported in this paper
are available at https://github.com/bjbarrett/cebusinnovation2017.
1To whom correspondence should be addressed. Email: sperry@anthro.ucla.edu.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1620739114/-/DCSupplemental.
7806–7813 | PNAS | July 25, 2017 | vol. 114 | no. 30 www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1620739114
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 92.208.224.29 on August 11, 2026 from IP address 92.208.224.29.


PDF PAGE 2
of innovations is inhibited by insufficient exposure to members of
other social groups.
The thorniest challenges in the rapidly growing field of animal
innovation research arise in devising methods for quantifying
innovation rates and determining the characteristics of innova-
tors. Most research on animal innovation thus far has involved
either ( i) analysis of anecdotes drawn from published literature
on topics other than innovation (16 –18) or ( ii) experiments in
either the field or the laboratory, in which experimenters present
individuals with a novel problem to solve (8, 9, 19 –22). The most
prominent body of innovation research using observational data
has focused on orangutans ( Pongo) using developmental data
from rehabilitants (23) or “geographic contrasts methods ” akin
to those used to diagnose probable social traditions (24, 25) to
infer innovation rates by evaluating the patterning of within- and
between-group behavioral variation in short-term studies of both
captive and field populations (12, 13, 26). Few field studies of in-
novation are longitudinal or look at the properties of individuals
that make them more, or less, likely to innovate within their lifetime.
There are advantages and disadvantages to all of these
methods, and none of them seemed entirely suitable for our
goals, which are to ( i) document the kinds of behaviors present
in the innovation repertoire in wild white-faced capuchins, ( ii)i n -
vestigate differences in rates of innovation across behavioral
domains, ( iii) determine what features of individuals (rank,
sex, age, and sociality) predict propensity to innovate, and
(iv) determine whether new behaviors become established com-
ponents of individual or group behavioral repertoires. Our ap-
proach differs from previous approaches to documentation
of behavioral innovation, in that it was implemented into the
core data collection protocol ove r a 10-y period, for which there
was dense behavioral sampling of multiple social groups in the
same ecological context. This approach provides the advantage
of enabling researchers to detec t probable innovations in any
behavioral domain and have suf ficient time depth to know who
the probable innovators are (details are in Methods).
There are several biologically relevant behavioral contexts, or
domains, that are difficult to study experimentally. Studies have
largely looked at the diffusion of novel foraging tasks for good
reasons. Experimentally seeded innovations or problem-solving
tasks provide controlled contexts, where both the latency of in-
dividuals innovating a solution and the social diffusion of inno-
vations may be studied. Innovating solutions to novel tasks is also
of obvious adaptive value. However, many innovations that are
ecologically or socially relevant are difficult to study experi-
mentally. Some animals have innovative social interaction, i.e.,
“social games, ” which may serve as bond testing rituals and can
be socially transmitted (27). Some wild animals display repetitive
self-directed “quirks,” perhaps to self-soothe, akin to the pro-
posed function of some stereotyped coping behaviors in captive
and wild animals (28). Other behavioral innovations have no
apparent immediate biological or ecological function.
Systematic observational study of innovations across a wide
range of behavioral domains permits us to explore whether indi-
vidual propensity to innovate is generalized or whether individuals
will be differentially prone to innovate in different behavioral do-
mains according to their ecology and life history. For example, it has
been suggested that “necessity is the mother of invention ” and
hence, that individuals who are young, low-ranking, and/or socially
peripheral will be more prone to inventing new foraging strategies
(29); this hypothesis has yielded m ixed results in past literature
reviews (6). In general, there are few strong theoretical expectations
about how age, sex, rank, and sociality affect innovation rates; we
need natural history and observational studies to help guide theory.
Capuchin monkeys (genera Cebus and Sapajus) are expected
to have unusually high innovation rates for myriad reasons.
Comparative studies have shown that brain size covaries with
innovation frequency in primates and birds (30, 31), and capuchins
are notable for their large relative brain sizes (32). White-faced
capuchins (Cebus capucinus) are also omnivorous extractive for-
agers (33, 34), an ecological trait positively related to innovation in
callitrichids (35), and profit greatly from experimenting with new
foods and feeding techniques. Capuchins have radiated over a
large, ecologically diverse geographic area (34, 36), which suggests
that they are capable of adapting their behavior to novel situa-
tions. They frequently interact with and investigate other species
as predators, prey, and feeding competitors (37, 38). It has been
suggested by Sol et al. (39) that innovative tendencies in birds
have coevolved with life history in generalist species, with slow-
developing, large-brained species prioritizing future over current
reproduction and being more likely to innovate and produce
plastic responses to changing conditions. If this model holds true
in other taxa, capuchins should be excellent candidates for high
innovation rate given their life histories and ecological niche.
White-faced capuchins live in multimale, multifemale social
groups that are highly xenophobic, offering little opportunity to
learn from members of other groups, except by migrating (40).
Capuchins are notable for the high frequency of coalition for-
mation and the creation of quirky social conventions that seem
to serve as means of testing the social bonds that are likely to be
important for enhancing fitness (27, 38, 40). The presence of
social traditions in the foraging and social domains (41) implies
that capuchins innovate as well.
Results
Innovations were classified in four categories or “behavioral
domains”: foraging, self-directed, social, and investigative. The
foraging category included 17 behaviors related to drinking water
or processing food, 4 of which were independently invented in
other groups and only 2 of which persisted in the innovator ’s
repertoire. One of these was a form of tool use: the use of leaves
to wrap and scrub the urticating hairs off of Automeris caterpillars.
Another was the use of the tail tip as a sponge to access water
from tree holes too deep to reach with a hand or foot ( Movie S1).
The latter was invented only once during the period of 2007 –
2011 by a female who did this regularly but did not transmit it to
other group members. This same tail-dipping behavior was in-
dependently invented in the buffer period (2002 –2006) by mon-
keys in three other groups and spread to multiple individuals in
one of those groups. (The buffer period was a time period during
which we did not score innovations, but we used this time period
to confirm whether behaviors seen in the subsequent 5-y period
were truly new to that group. Details are in Methods.) It was not
possible to reliably score food choice innovations and assign them
to particular innovators, but the foraging category would have
been much larger had we been able to include them.
The self-directed category included nine behaviors related to
enhancing comfort, dental hygiene, self-soothing, and self-
stimulation. Capuchins are prone to inventing “personal quirks,”
especially involving clutching or poking some part of their own
body for prolonged periods of time. These habits may persist for
years and might be transmitted to other group members. There
were many individuals in the 2007 –2011 dataset that were still
practicing postural quirks that they invented during the buffer
period (2002 –2006), and those are not evident in SI Appendix ,
Table S1 .T h e “body part hold ” category lumps together many
different types of postural quirks; if we split this category more
finely, there would be far more innovations in this domain.
The social category includes 47 forms of social interaction that
are not part of the standard species repertoire. Eight of these
were independently invented in multiple groups, and most of
these inventions involved incorporation of behavioral elements
from the foraging repertoire into the exploration or use of the
interaction partner ’s body (e.g., explorations of the partner ’s
orifices or mouthing parts of the partner). Some behaviors (e.g.,
dental examinations, eye poking, hand sniffing, sucking of body
Perry et al. PNAS | July 25, 2017 | vol. 114 | no. 30 | 7807
ANTHROPOLOGY COLLOQUIUM
PAPER
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 92.208.224.29 on August 11, 2026 from IP address 92.208.224.29.


PDF PAGE 3
parts, toy game, and hair game) have been invented in multiple
groups over the years and have become well-established tradi-
tions in some groups; hence, many of these behaviors scored as
innovations for this 2007 –2011 time period were invented before
2007 in other groups and still in practice (and hence, not counted
as innovations) during this time period. Both past work and the
patterning of results in SI Appendix , Table S1 suggest that those
social rituals that involve some discomfort or risk (e.g., having an
appendage bitten or damaging an eye) are more prone to remain
in individual repertoires and become established in group rep-
ertoires. In addition to the aforementioned behaviors that have
been proposed as bond-testing behaviors (41), the social category
of innovations includes social play, social displays, and some
creative ways for females to regulate infant behavior.
The investigative category included creative manipulations of
other species (e.g., porcupines, howler monkeys, and turtles),
human artifacts, leaves, sand, sticks, water, rocks, and other in-
animate objects as well as innovative ways of locomoting through
the forest. Most of these behaviors had no obvious immediate
purpose and gave the impression that the innovator was engaged
in recreational creativity, exploring the affordances of the ma-
terials. To give a few examples, in “cow pie seesaw ” (Movie S2),
the young monkey flips over a dried piece of cattle dung the
length of her body, so that the flat side is on top and the rounded
side contacts the ground; then, she stands on top, rocking back
and forth. In “mango hitting game, ” a young monkey routinely
finds mangos about one-half the size of her body on the ground
and applies hard, two-handed strikes to them for 4 –5 min at a
stretch, throwing her body weight into the assault on the mango,
with no apparent interest in eating it ( SI Appendix ). Less than
15% of investigative behaviors were seen more than once in
individual repertoires, and only 18% were subsequently observed
being practiced by the innovator ’s groupmates.
The final dataset, described in detail in SI Appendix, Table S1 ,
included 187 innovations, 127 of which were unique behavior
types. Of the 187 innovations, 149 (80%) of them we never again
saw performed by the innovator, and only 41 (22%) were seen
performed by other monkeys in the same group (i.e., had the
potential to have become a tradition during the observation
period). Of the 127 unique innovations seen, 54 (42.5%) were in
the investigative domain, 47 (37.0%) related to social behavior,
9 (7.1%) were self-directed behaviors, and 17 (13.4%) were
foraging behaviors. At least one innovation, based on our con-
servative criteria, was scored in 117 of 234 individuals included in
this dataset. Descriptions of all innovations are included in SI
Appendix, and SI Appendix , Table S1 reports the distribution of
these behavioral variants across social groups and individuals.
Innovations were rare, being observed, on average, less than
once per individual per year in any particular domain. These
annual rates may appear low, but our aim is to predict the
properties of an individual that make him/her more prone to
innovate in particular behavioral domains. If one ignores the
properties of individuals or behavioral domains, annual group-
wide innovation rates (Fig. 1), which have been the focus of
many field studies of innovation, are much higher; however, we
can learn much about individual innovators by taking this more
detailed approach.
Our global model (referred to as mASRMG in Table 1) re-
ceived overwhelming support compared with other models
[having a Widely Applicable Information Criterion (WAIC)
weight of 1.00] and suggests that sociality and age are the most
important predictors of innovation (Table 1). From posterior
median (PM) estimates and 89% credible intervals (89% CIs),
our model suggests that marginal rates of innovation per indi-
vidual per year (innovation rates) are highest in the social do-
main (PM = 0.122; 89% CI = 0.064–0.195) followed by the
investigative domain (PM = 0.085; 89% CI = 0.047–0.147),
foraging domain (PM = 0.028; 89% CI = 0.014 –0.052), and
self-directed domain (PM = 0.018; 89% CI = 0.008 –0.037).
Much of the variance in probability of innovating can be ex-
plained by individual identity ( σid of αp = 1.01) and social group
membership ( σ group of αp = 1.56). Importantly, differences
between behavioral domains account for more variation in rates
of innovation (Table 2) than between-individual or -group dif-
ferences for all other varying effect parameters with the excep-
tion of βmalep (SI Appendix, Table S2 ). Because interpreting the
coefficients of these models can be nonintuitive and because they
interact multiplicatively to estimate innovation rates in each
domain, we instead refer the reader to plots of model predictions
(Figs. 2 and 3 andSI Appendix,F i g s .S 1–S4) for all estimated effects.
For our model predictions, we display the posterior predic-
tions for each individual ’s annual innovation rate in each be-
havioral domain. The y axes may represent ( i) the estimated
number of innovations per individual monkey per year or the
joint probability, (1 − p) × λ (Figs. 2 and 3 and SI Appendix, Figs.
S3A and S4 A). In some cases, looking at the individual compo-
nents of a zero-inflated Poisson (ZIP) model can be informative,
and therefore, we also present ( ii) the probability of innovating
per year, 1 − p,( SI Appendix , Figs. S1 A–D,S 2 A–D,S 3 B, and
S4B) and (iii) the number of innovations per year estimated to be
observed conditional on being an innovator, λ (SI Appendix, Figs.
S1 E–H,S 2 E–H, S3, and S4 C).
Age. Age differentially predicts innovativeness across behavioral
contexts. Younger individuals innovate at higher rates in the
investigative, foraging, and self-directed domains, although the
effect size is quite small for self-directed and foraging behaviors
(Fig. 2 A–C). Older individuals are slightly more innovative in
the social domain (Fig. 2 D and Table 2). This effect was more
heavily driven by the probability of being an innovator (SI Appendix,
Fig. S1 A–D and Table S2 ) than the number of innovations con-
ditional on being an innovator. Younger innovators seem slightly
more likely to produce more innovations, conditional on being
an innovator, but this effect is small ( SI Appendix , Fig. S1 E–H)
and near zero in most domains.
AA CU FF FL LB
2468 1 0
MK NM
2468 1 0
RF
2468 1 0
RR
2468 1 0
SP
2468 1 0
estimated annual innovation rate per group
Fig. 1. Posterior predictions of annual innovation rate (number of inno-
vations per year) for each group. Two-letter names of the social groups are
at the top of each panel; vertical lines indicate PMs. n = 44 group-years.
Table 1. WAIC estimates for all evaluated innovation models
Model WAIC dWAIC wWAIC SE
mASRMG 1,442.02 0 1 81.97
mA 1,478.34 36.32 0 84.38
mS 1,503.03 61.01 0 84.49
m 1,510.11 68.09 0 84.22
mRG 1,526.1 84.08 0 86.46
mM 1,570.25 128.23 0 88.39
Capital letters in model names correspond to predictors included: age (A),
sociality (S), rank (R), sex (M), and group size (G). dWAIC, difference in WAIC
scores from the highest ranked model; wWAIC, WAIC weight.
7808 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1620739114 Perry et al.
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 92.208.224.29 on August 11, 2026 from IP address 92.208.224.29.


PDF PAGE 4
Sociality. Sociality also differentially predicts innovation across
behavioral domains. More social individuals showed higher rates
of innovation in the social (Fig. 3 D) domain. Less social indi-
viduals had higher innovation rates in the foraging (Fig. 3 A),
investigative (Fig. 3 B), and self-directed (Fig. 3 C) domains, al-
though these effects are weak and less certain. More social in-
dividuals produced a greater number of innovations per year
(conditional on being innovators) in the social domain ( SI Ap-
pendix, Fig. S2 H), whereas less social individuals showed a
greater number of innovations in the self-directed domain ( SI
Appendix, Fig. S2 G), and there was little effect of sociality on
foraging ( SI Appendix , Fig. S2 E) and investigative ( SI Appendix ,
Fig. S2 F) behaviors.
Sex. Males (PM = 0.034; 89% CI = 0.014–0.074) have slightly
higher innovation rates than females (PM = 0.024; 89% CI =
0.011–0.045), ignoring between-domain variation. Males were
slightly more likely to be innovators ( SI Appendix , Fig. S3 B).
Within the social and investigative domains, males showed
slightly higher innovation rates both overall and conditional on
being innovators, but there were no discernable effects of sex in
the foraging and self-directed domains ( SI Appendix , Fig. S3 A
and C). Where these small differences exist, they are uncertain
and potentially of no biological significance.
Rank. Ignoring domain-specific effects, we found that innovation
rate is highest in middle-ranking individuals (PM = 0.036; 89%
CI = 0.017–0.070) followed by high-ranking individuals (PM =
0.026; 89% CI = 0.011–0.058) and lowest in low-ranking indi-
viduals (PM = 0.021; 89% CI = 0.009–0.48). Rank did not have
consistent or strong effects on overall innovation rates within
domains, although there was a slight tendency for midranking
individuals to show higher innovation rates in the social and
investigative domains ( SI Appendix, Fig. S4 A) relative to low- or
high-ranking individuals; this pattern held for the rates of in-
novation conditional on being an innovator ( SI Appendix , Fig.
S4C). However, within each domain, low-rankers had a slightly
higher probability of becoming innovators than mid- or high-
ranked individuals ( SI Appendix , Fig. S4 B). Most of these rank-
related domain-specific effects are relatively small and uncertain,
and therefore, we hesitate to make strong claims about them.
Discussion
Utility of This Method for Identifying Innovations. On the surface, it
would seem that white-faced capuchins have the largest reper-
toire of innovations of any primate species studied thus far, but
we encourage caution in comparing the sizes of different species ’
innovation repertoires or their individual innovation rates be-
cause of differences in methods between studies. The method
that we used here differs from previous approaches in the fol-
lowing ways.
i) Researchers were vigilant for innovations and recorded
them throughout the study period, likely resulting in fewer
overlooked innovations than in other long-term studies. It
also enabled rigorous recording of innovations across a
a. foraging
0 0.5 1 1.5
b. investigative
c. self-directed
123
00 . 511 . 5
d. social
123
individual innovation rate
log(age)
Fig. 2. Joint model predictions for the effect of age on the number of inno-
vations per individual per year in the domains of (A) foraging, (B)i n v e s t i g a t i v e ,
(C ) self-directed and (D) social behaviors. Dark lines are at the PMs; lighter lines
are 100 randomly sampled posterior predictions. n = 3,132 individual-years.
a. foraging
0 0.5 1 1.5
b. investigative
c. self-directed
-3 -2 -1 0 1 2 300 . 511 . 5
d. social
-3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3
individual innovation rate
sociality scores (standardized)
Fig. 3. Joint model predictions for the effect of sociality on the number of
innovations per individual per year. Dark lines are at the PMs; lighter lines
are 100 randomly sampled posterior predictions. n = 3,132 individual-years.
Table 2. Posterior mean estimates of varying effects of
behavioral domain
Parameter
Behavioral domain
Foraging Investigative Self-directed Social
αp −0.12 −0.45 0.01 0.06
αl −0.98 0.07 −1.38 0.49
βagep 2.37 3.96 2.97 −1.64
βagel 0.03 −0.52 −0.04 0.24
βsocialityp −0.03 −0.31 0.23 −0.13
βsocialityl −0.32 −0.09 −0.52 0.51
βrank.highp 0.14 −0.46 −0.02 0.00
βrank.highl 0.05 −0.32 0.15 −0.01
βrank.lowp −0.37 −0.42 −0.44 0.19
βrank.lowl −0.21 0.03 −0.21 0.13
βmalep 0.12 −0.57 0.33 −0.09
βmalel −0.09 0.08 −0.26 0.20
Perry et al. PNAS | July 25, 2017 | vol. 114 | no. 30 | 7809
ANTHROPOLOGY COLLOQUIUM
PAPER
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 92.208.224.29 on August 11, 2026 from IP address 92.208.224.29.


PDF PAGE 5
wider range of behavioral domains than would have been the
case had we focused our data collection on a specialized
research topic not specifically related to innovation in multi-
ple behavioral domains. Despite efforts to record all possible
types of innovations, we failed to record food choice innova-
tions with sufficient rigor to include them in this analysis.
ii) This study generated a high density of behavioral observa-
tions compared with most primate field projects because of
the year-round presence of a large number of well-trained
data collectors. This higher sampling density suggests that,
relative to other studies, more true innovations would have
been observed and also, perhaps, that fewer false positives
would have been generated (i.e., fewer rare species-typical
behaviors labeled as innovations simply because they had
not been observed in other practitioners because of low
sampling density).
iii) The large number of groups monitored in essentially iden-
tical ecological circumstances with overlapping home ranges
offered better opportunity than most studies for identifying
innovations via comparison of presence vs. absence in groups
exhibiting similar ecologies. With the exception of five of the
innovations concerned with ex ploration of human artifacts,
there is no reason to think that monkeys had differential oppor-
tunities to discover particular innovations. Having more groups
in the sample might make it easier to find one that lacked some
rare behavior, although the long-term nature of the study com-
bined with the dense behavioral sampling probably mitigate this
tendency for the large number of groups to produce false pos-
itives of innovation caused by presence/absence contrasts.
iv) The long-term nature of the study and the use of a 5-y buffer
period before the observation period reduce the chance that
behaviors will be falsely termed innovations when they are
actually low-frequency behaviors already in the repertoire. If
our study had been the length of a typical dissertation proj-
ect (i.e., 1 y) and if we had assumed that behaviors were new
to the practitioners if it was the first time that we had seen
them performed in those groups, then we would have had
52% more innovations in our sample than we obtained by
using the buffer period method and requiring each recorded
innovation to be the first sighting by that individual in its
group(s) of residence.
v) Our method is more conservative than the definition used by
Ramsey et al. (12), which defines innovations as being new
to individual repertoires but not necessarily new to group
repertoires. We recognize the possibility of having indepen-
dent inventions within a single social group, and we suspect
that many true innovations in our sample have been discarded
because of the suspicion that they may be the products of
social learning. On the whole, we think that our method pro-
vides a more accurate technique for diagnosing innovations
than alternative observational methods. However, overlook-
ing independent inventions within the same social group is
one way in which we likely underestimate innovation rates.
vi) Our approach looks at the properties that affect individual
propensities to innovate and longitudinally tracks the rate of
innovation over 5 y. Previous studies have looked at group-
level differences or short windows of time. Our hierarchical
statistical approach accounts for unequal sampling effort
among individuals, estimates between- and within-individual
variation, and avoids the potential problem of falsely making
inferences about individual innovation rate from potentially
spurious group-level effects.
Rates and Types of Innovation in Capuchin Monkeys. Evidence that
individuals, on average, ( i) innovate in any one of these four
domains less than once per year, ( ii) retain only about 20% of
these innovations in their repertoires, ( iii) transmit no more than
22% of their innovations to other group members, and ( iv)
generally produce innovations with no obvious utility may give an
artificially low impression of the biological importance that in-
novation has for behavioral repertoires overall. Most groups
have a current repertoire of bond-testing signals that have been
steadily practiced by a subset of the group for many years, and
these behaviors are not, for the most part, scored as innovations
in this dataset, because they first appeared in the buffer period or
even earlier. Food choice innovations (not reported here be-
cause of the interobserver reliability challenge of being able to
correctly identify plants the first time that they are eaten) tend to
be adopted quickly and remain in repertoires for long periods of
time, such as is the case for chimpanzees (42) and various species
of monkeys (29). Particularly useful food processing or drinking
techniques, once invented, are likely to persist in repertoires for
many years [or even centuries (43)]. Tail-dipping to access water
in deep tree holes seems to have been independently invented in
four groups at Lomas, originating during the 2002 –2006 period
in three of these groups (and therefore, not counting as an in-
novation according to our definition) but persisting during the
2007–2011 period in two of those three groups. Although many
of the innovative behaviors recorded during this 5-y period seem
to be aimless creativity with no obvious utilitarian goal in mind
(aside from the foraging behaviors), it is important to remember
that innovations, like mutations, may not be particularly bene-
ficial on their own but may become exapted (44) and acquire a
benefit when paired with a particular ecological or social context
(even if the initial pairing is accidental). For example, a poten-
tially risky behavior, such as sticking a finger deep into the eye
socket of a partner, might yield benefits if it is incorporated into
a dyadic ritual that tests the quality of an important social bond
(27, 45). Additionally, many of the capuchin innovations in this
dataset might inform the developing monkey about the affor-
dances of objects or how his/her body relates to the environment,
providing useful feedback, even if there is no practical value to
permanently incorporating the new behavior into the behavioral
repertoire.
How the Capuchin Innovation Repertoire Compares with Those of
Chimpanzees and Orangutans. The profound methodological dif-
ferences between studies of these species preclude precise
quantitative comparisons of innovation rates in different be-
havioral domains, but we can at least make some crude quali-
tative comparisons between capuchins and the other two primate
species for which innovations have been systematically cataloged
in the wild. The Mahale chimpanzee researchers (42) present
data on 26 novel behaviors (after excluding food choice to make
their results more comparable with the other datasets) retro-
spectively extracted from their 43-y study of two chimpanzee
communities. Although studying innovation was not an explicit
part of their core data collection protocol, many researchers at
Mahale described behavioral variation and novel behaviors in
detail. They defined innovation as any behavior not seen in the
first 15 y of research. Innovation in orangutans has been ex-
plicitly studied using the geographic contrasts method in short-
term studies by van Schaik et al. (26) at multiple sites, producing
a sample of 44 putative innovations. Comparison of the distri-
bution of behaviors across domains in their datasets with the
composition of the repertoire in the dataset of 127 unique in-
novations from Lomas Barbudal suggests that capuchins, relative
to these ape species, devote a higher proportion of their creative
energy to investigation of their environment and devising new
social behaviors and a lower proportion to comfort-related be-
haviors and foraging. Orangutans are particularly prone to de-
vising new variants on nest-building techniques, and even their
novel acoustic behaviors seem to emerge primarily in a nest-
building context. Both ape species are more innovative with
regard to bodily comfort and hygiene than capuchins. Capuchins
rarely seem to prioritize comfort: they do not build nests, and
7810 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1620739114 Perry et al.
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 92.208.224.29 on August 11, 2026 from IP address 92.208.224.29.


PDF PAGE 6
they readily endure stings, bites, urticating hairs, and spiny veg-
etation in the process of acquiring food. Although nearly 4% of
unique innovations may serve to mitigate physical discomfort,
this percentage is low compared with both chimpanzees (15%)
and orangutans (36%). Capuchins devoted about 42% of their
innovation repertoire to the investigative domain compared with
chimpanzees (31%) and orangutans (14%). Orangutans are cu-
riously neophobic relative to both chimpanzees and capuchins,
and the exploration of the environment that they engage in as
young individuals is primarily focused on the mother ’s activities
rather than independent discovery (13), whereas capuchins engage
in much object play and independent exploration of the affordances
of the environment at an early age. The preponderance of in-
vestigative sorts of innovations in orangutans seems to be devoted to
solving the problem of how to safely engage in arboreal locomotion
as a large-bodied animal (26, 46)—a problem that is less difficult for
a small-bodied animal with a prehensile tail. Within the category of
social innovations, capuchins were more prone to inventing be-
haviors related to social bonding, whereas chimpanzees placed
more emphasis on aggressive displays. This emphasis is consistent
with the importance of alliances and hence, bond tests in capuchins:
males need allies for parallel dispersal and to acquire and maintain
breeding positions, and females depend on allies to defend food
resources and infants from potentially infanticidal males (40).
What Factors Affect Propensity to Innovate in Other Species? In this
study, younger animals were more innovative in all behavioral
domains except for social interaction, in which the tendency was
reversed. This result is consistent with capuchins ’ slow life his-
tory, generalist ecological niche, and complex social relation-
ships. During a long juvenile phase, individuals have much to
gain by experimenting with both new foods and more efficient
ways of acquiring resources. As they age, capuchins increasingly
have reason to form and test the quality of those social rela-
tionships that will prove critical for acquiring and protecting
access to the food and social resources needed for enhancing
reproductive success (40), and therefore, it makes sense that older
animals are more prone to innovation in the social domain.
Studies of other species provide mixed results regarding the effect
of age on innovative tendencies. A review of the published primate
literature suggests that adults innovate more than immatures (16),
and this pattern has been corroborated by experimental studies of
innovation in callitrichids (22) and meerkats (20), in which young
animals were less likely than adults to successfully solve a novel
extractive foraging task, possibly because of insufficient develop-
ment of dexterity. Chimpanzees are a notable exception to this
general pattern; high rates of innovation, particularly of the social
and investigative sort, are observed in immature chimpanzees (16,
29). Among human children, older children are better than
younger children at solving novel problems (47). It is worth noting
that, in this study, we were probably measuring something more
akin to creativity and exploration rather than skill at solving a task,
and it is possible that the innovations created by older capuchins
could be argued to be more sophisticated in some way.
The other variable that had a strong effect on capuchins ’
propensity to innovate was sociality: more social capuchins were
more prone to inventing novel social interaction types, and more
social monkeys were also slightly more likely to have their social
innovations picked up by other group members (although we
cannot currently say whether this is because of social learning)
(SI Appendix, Fig. S5 B). These results can probably be explained
simply by the fact that more social individuals have more op-
portunities to experiment with novel forms of social interaction.
The existing literature on innovation does not have much to say
about the effects of sociality per se, aside from predicting that
technological innovations will be more common in peripheral
animals who are less distracted by social life (29). However, the
literature does address dominance rank as a predictive variable,
and subordinates are often less socially central than dominants.
Because there was not a strong rank effect in this dataset, we
remain hesitant about making claims regarding rank mediating
the relationship between sociality and innovative tendencies.
Although sex and rank (16, 20, 29) are often predictive of
innovative tendencies in other species, neither variable had much
explanatory power in the capuchin dataset. Capuchin males were
slightly more likely to innovate in all domains, which is consistent
with observations from other primates (16) and meerkats (20)
but not guppies (48); however, these effects were so small and
uncertain in the capuchin dataset that they are not likely to have
any biological significance.
With a better understanding of innovation, the next logical
questions to address are two questions linking this research to
the social learning literature. What properties of innovations and
what properties of innovators make the innovations most likely
to be socially transmitted to oth er group members? Adequate an-
swers to these questions are beyond the scope of this paper, but
preliminary analyses suggest that age and group size of the innovator
might be important drivers (SI Appendix, SI Text and Fig. S5).
Methods
Study Site and Subjects. The study was performed at Lomas Barbudal Biological
Reserve in Guanacaste, Costa Rica, a tropical dry forest described in the work by
Frankie et al. (49). This population ofC. capucinus has been the subject of long-
term study by Perry et al. (50) since 1990, starting with a single social group.
The number of regularly monitored groups has since expanded by both fission
of research groups and habituation of new groups to include 10 groups by the
end of 2011.
One of the methodological problems in documenting innovations is the
difficulty of knowing whether a particular behavior has ever been performed
or observed by a particular individual. In a short-term study, when the re-
searchers have little experience with the animals, many rare behaviors will be
falsely scored as innovations simply because the researcher has not seen them
previously. Ironically, such sampling biases may result in the misimpression
that innovation rates are higher in short-term studies than long-term studies.
Such problems are mitigated in this study by ( i) using data from a long-term
study; (ii) generating a high density of observations by using a large staff to
collect year-round behavioral data, in which new behaviors were explicitly
recorded; ( iii) explicitly training observers to watch for and record new be-
haviors; and ( iv) having a single observer with 26 y of experience collecting
data on this population (S.E.P.) make the final determinations about which
behaviors are truly new for each group of monkeys, with input from two
additional long-term researchers (B.J.B. and I.G.).
Beginning in January of 2002, all research staff were directed to make
freeform comments about any behaviors that did not neatly fit into the
standard ethogram of species-specific behavior and explicitly mark comment
lines as comment innovation when they thought they were seeing a behavior
that they had never seen before in that group or a behavior that they thought
was a unique behavioral tradition. Naturally, many behaviors seem new to
relatively inexperienced observers, and therefore, not all of the behaviors
initially coded as innovations were true innovations. Also, some behaviors not
coded as innovations in the comments section were, in fact, true innovations.
S.E.P., who personally collected 13,770 h of data on this population from
1990 to 2016, read through all data to determine whether behavioral se-
quences were likely to be true innovations (i.e., behaviors seen for the first
time in that particular social group).
This research was performed in compliance with the laws of Costa Rica,
and the protocol was approved by the University of California, Los Angeles
Animal Care Committee (ARC 1996-122 and 2005-084 plus various renewals).
Buffer Period. We used a 5-y chunk of observational data (35,196 h collected
between January 1, 2007 and December 31, 2011) to look for innovations. We
used the 5 preceding years of data ( ∼37,514 h of observation collected during
2002–2006) as a “buffer period ” (i.e., a period in which we could search for
prior instances of behaviors that appeared to be innovations within the
targeted 2007 –2011 time period). If we had not left a large buffer period,
we would have falsely concluded that far more behaviors within the time
period of interest were innovations. SI Appendix ,T a b l eS 1reports, for each
innovation, the number of groups in which it occurred, its persistence in the
innovator’s repertoire, and whether it spread to other group members.
Data were collected by a team of 50 highly trained observers ( ∼12 per
year), each of whom underwent a training period of approximately 3 mo of
Perry et al. PNAS | July 25, 2017 | vol. 114 | no. 30 | 7811
ANTHROPOLOGY COLLOQUIUM
PAPER
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 92.208.224.29 on August 11, 2026 from IP address 92.208.224.29.


PDF PAGE 7
dawn to dusk instruction and interobserver reliability testing before con-
tributing data to the database. Interobserver reliability tests for monkey
identifications and coding were repeated monthly throughout their tenures
at the field site. Obviously, we could not train observers to reliably code
innovations (behaviors that had not yet happened) in the same ways. We
could, however, ensure that the observers recognized and reliably recorded
basic motor movements, gestures, and 205 behaviors considered to be part
of the species-typical behavioral repertoire. This repertoire was based
on >6,000 h of observation invested in studying these monkeys during 1990 –
2001 before explicit recording of innovations began, thereby enabling
better detection of the idiosyncratic behaviors.
Although we gave instructions to data collection teams to record any type
of innovation in any behavioral domain, we decided not to include inno-
vations regarding ( i) choices of food or medicinal plants and ( ii) vocal be-
havior in this analysis. Although we witnessed many instances of apparent
innovation regarding use of novel foods and medicines, we lacked sufficient
confidence in observers ’ ability to accurately identify rarely used plants and
insects or accurately identify rarely produced vocalizations.
A behavioral observation was scored as an innovation if it met the fol-
lowing criteria: ( i) the behavior was absent in some of the groups that we
regularly monitor, ( ii) it was the first time that this behavior had been seen
in this group during 2007 –2011, and ( iii) this behavior had not been seen in
this group during the buffer period time period preceding 2007 during the
lifetime of the putative innovator. In cases of group fission or migration, we
required that the behavior not have been seen previously in the other
groups of which the potential innovator had been a member. There was one
class of behaviors on which an additional criterion was imposed: postural
habits, such as clutching of one ’s own body parts or sniffing one ’s own hand
(SI Appendix ).
The number of innovations was also counted via two less conservative
methods for methodological comparison. In one version, we eliminated the
buffer period criterion, calling the first observation of a behavior in a par-
ticular group an innovation. This method yielded 263 innovations compared
with 187 produced with the more conservative method described above. In an
even less stringent version that yielded 282 innovations, we termed a be-
havior an innovation if it had not been seen in that group in the past year.
Another challenge in defining innovation is the “grain” problem (i.e.,
determining the descriptive breadth of behavioral categories or in other
words, the extent to which to lump vs. split behaviors) (51). The grain
problem is insoluble; the best that we can do is to use our intuitions about
what the animals themselves seem to consider novel and observations of
how these behaviors cluster in the repertoires of groups and individuals. Are
novel actions used as part of a task already in the behavioral repertoire
novelties? In our view, they usually were. Are the same actions applied to
different objects? Unless the objects and contexts were quite radically dif-
ferent, we opted to lump these together (i.e., we did not designate them as
innovations). This issue was most prominent in our decision-making when
evaluating clutching of different body parts (a self-directed behavior),
sucking of different body parts (a social behavior), and the “toy game, ”
which involves passing an object from mouth to mouth. In all of these cases,
we chose to lump rather than split behaviors. In the case of object play (e.g.,
with sand, water, or rocks), different actions used by different individuals in
interacting with these same substances were scored as different behaviors.
Descriptions of the complete list of behaviors that were included in our
analysis are in SI Appendix .
Innovations were classified in four categories or behavioral domains, the
content of which is described in greater detail in Results: foraging, self-
directed behavior, social behaviors, and investigative behaviors (explora-
tion of the environment).
Data Structure. We created a different row for every individual monkey/year/
behavioral domain combination, and a value was scored for the number of
innovations observed for that combination; this number was the output
variable. We measured four main predictor variables to determine what
predicts the number of innovations per individual per year: age, sex, sociality,
and rank. ( i) Age. To calculate age, we subtracted the birth year of an indi-
vidual from the year of observation and added one. Individuals born in the
same year as the year of observation were excluded from the dataset. Age was
log-transformed and centered for analysis. (ii) Sex. We coded sex as a dummy
variable (one for males and zero for females). ( iii) Sociality. Sociality was cal-
culated using data from group scans, which were taken opportunistically for
all group members, at intervals no closer together than 10 min. For each in-
dividual per calendar year, we calculated the proportion of group scans in
which the individual was in proximity (i.e., within ∼400 cm) to at least one
other group member other than their dependent offspring (i.e., for females,
their offspring that are less than 1 y of age). Individuals with less than 20 scans
per year were excluded from analysis. Sociality scores were standardized, so
that a sociality score of one is 1 SD above the centered mean of zero. (iv) Rank.
For individuals older than 3 y old, rank was calculated using the EloRating
package in R (52). We used outcomes from dyadic interactions involving
avoids, cowers, flees, and supplants to determine dominance. We used default
Elo parameters, with initial Elo scores set to 1,000, and the constant k set to
100. Rank was estimated using average Elo scores calculated for each individual
per calendar year. Young juveniles less than 3 y old were given Elo Scores of
zero to assure a low rank within their social groups. Members of a group were
divided up into tertiles, with the corresponding levels receiving rank categories
of high, middle, and low. High and low ranks were estimated as dummy vari-
ables, with middle rank serving as the intercept-only reference category.
Statistical Methods. Our outcome variable, number of innovations, is a count
variable with many zero values. Each monkey was observed over multiple
years. Membership in a particular group may have affected propensities to
innovate. Therefore, we analyzed these data using a series of hierarchical ZIP
models. ZIP models are mixture models that use two probability distribu-
tions. One component assumes a Bernoulli distribution and estimates p:t h e
probability of observing a zero. The other component assumes a Poisson
distribution and estimates λ: the estimated mean of a Poisson distribution.
ZIP models permit a mixture of causal factors to be evaluated and help
better predict outcomes when there is a large number of zeros because of
both the rarity of an event and false negatives. The joint likelihood of ob-
serving an innovation can be calculated by multiplying the likelihoods of the
Bernoulli and Poisson outcomes and converting them to the real number
scale using their corresponding link functions. We graphically present joint
posterior predictions here (Figs. 2 and 3) along with model predictions of
p and λ in SI Appendix (SI Appendix , Figs. S1 –S4).
We looked at four predictors in this analysis: ( i) age, ( ii) sex, ( iii) sociality,
and (iv) rank. We also estimated unique offsets for each individual, because
they differed in observation time or exposure. We analyzed six models, four
of which corresponded to one of the single aforementioned predictors. The
other two included a global model that looked at all four predictors and an
intercepts-only model. In each model, we used varying intercepts for each
individual ( n = 234), social group ( n = 10), and behavioral domain ( n = 4).
Varying slopes for domains and groups were estimated for all four predic-
tors, and varying slopes for individuals were estimated for sociality and age.
Group size was used as a covariate to control for the numerical likelihood
that, in smaller groups, observed behaviors might be more likely to be
scored as innovations because of our definition of uniqueness and that a
greater number of innovations is more likely in larger groups. In another
analysis, we used experimental year as a varying effect to see if there were
any biases in data collection between field assistant cohorts that would
change our inference. There were none, and therefore, we excluded these
parameters from our final analyses to simplify the presentation of results.
Offsets and Exposure. Because observations of innovations were collected not
only in focal follows but also, ad libitum, and because individuals varied in
their likelihood of being observed because of data collection protocols or
their visibility in the group, they also differed in exposure. To account for
differences in exposure, we calculated an annual offset for each individual in
each calendar year. Offsets for each individual ( Oi) were estimated using
Oi = log
/C18Gi + Fi
365
/C19
,
where Gi is the number of instantaneous group scans calculated per calen-
dar year for each individual i, and Fi is the number of point samples collected
at 2.5-min intervals during focal follows in a calendar year. These offsets
were included alongside linear predictors in each model.
Models were fit using the map2stan function in the R package rethinking
(53). Models were fit using Hamilton Markov Chain Monte Carlo in r-STAN
(v 2.14) (54) in R v. 3.3.2 (55). Models were compared with widely applicable
information criteria (WAIC) using the compare function in rethinking. The
corresponding code and data used for each model and graph production can
be found through a link in SI Appendix .
To estimate group-level difference in annual innovation rate, we summed
the number of innovations observed within each group and across all indi-
viduals and behavioral domains. Exposure rates for individuals within groups
were summed within years. Counts of annual innovations per group were
then fit using a hierarchical Poisson model fit using r-STAN that accounted for
exposure rates using metrics previously described and varying intercepts for
7812 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1620739114 Perry et al.
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 92.208.224.29 on August 11, 2026 from IP address 92.208.224.29.


PDF PAGE 8
each group, thus providing an estimate of annual innovation rate per year
per group.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. The following field assistants contributed a year or
more of data to the Lomas Barbudal Monkey Project dataset: L. Beaudrot,
M. Bergstrom, R. Berl, A. Bjorkman, L. Blankenship, T. Borcuch, J. Broesch,
J. Butler, F. Campos, C. Carlson, S. Caro, M. Corrales, N. Donati, C. Dillis,
G. Dower, R. Dower, K. Feilen, K. Fisher, A. Fuentes J., M. Fuentes A.,
C. Gault, H. Gilkenson, I. Gottlieb, L. Hack, S. Herbert, C. Hirsch, C. Holman,
S. Hyde, L. Johnson, S. Lee, S. Leinwand, T. Lord, K. Kajokaite, M. Kay,
E. Kennedy, D. Kerhoas-Essens, E. Johnson, S. Kessler, S. MacCarter, J. Manson,
W. Meno, C. Mitchell, Y. Namba, A. Neyer, C. O ’Connell, J. C. Ordoñez,
J., N. Parker, B. Pav, R. Popa, K. Potter, K. Ratliff, H. Ruffler, S. Sanford,
M .S a u l ,I .S c h a m b e r g ,C .S c h m i t t ,A .S c o t t ,J .V e r g e ,A .W a l k e r - B o l t o n ,E .W i k b e r g ,
and E. Williams. We thank H. Gilkenson, W. Lammers, C. Dillis, M. Corrales,
and R. Popa for helping to manage the field site. E. Wikberg and K. Kajokaite
contributed a year or more of effort to organizing the dataset. D. Cohen
created the MySQL database. R. Hong assisted in the organization and
coding of the innovation data. This paper has benefitted from helpful discus-
sions with D. Caillaud, M. Crofoot, M. Grote, K. Kajokaite, R. McElreath,
J .M a n s o n ,K .P e r r y ,B .S c e l z a ,a n dM .J .W e s t - E b e r h a r d .W et h a n k
Marcus W. Feldman, Andrew Whiten, Kevin N. Laland, and Francisco J.
Ayala for the opportunity to participate in this Sackler Symposium. We
thank the Costa Rican park service (Sistema Nacional de Áreas de Conserva-
ción and Área de Conservación Tempisque), Hacienda Pelon de la Bajura,
Hacienda Brin D ’Amor, and the residents of San Ramon de Bagaces for per-
mission to work on their land. This project is based on work supported by the
funding provided to S.E.P. by the Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary
Anthropology, National Science Foundation (NSF) Grants SBR-0613226 and
BCS-0848360, two grants from the Leakey Foundation, two grants from the
National Geographic Society, and multiple Committee on Research grants
from the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA). B.J.B. was supported
by NSF Graduate Research Fellowship (GRF) Grant 1650042 and two
Achievement Rewards for College Scientists Foundation, Northern Cali-
fornia Chapter fellowships. I.G. was supported by the International Society
for Human Ethology, a Ford Foundation fellowship, an NSF GRF, and multi-
ple grants from UCLA. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommen-
dations expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the NSF or other funding agencies.
1. Imanishi K (1952) Man (Mainichi-Shinbunsha, Tokyo).
2. Kummer H (1971) Primate Societies: Group Techniques of Ecological Adaptation
(AHM Publ Corp, Arlington Heights, IL).
3. West-Eberhard MJ (2003) Developmental Plasticity and Evolution (Oxford Univ Press,
Oxford).
4. Giraldeau L-A, Caraco Y, Valone T (1994) Social foraging: Individual learning and
cultural transmission of innovations. Behav Ecol 5:35–43.
5. Sol D (2003) Behavioural flexibility: A neglected issue in the ecological and evolu-
tionary literature? Animal Innovation, eds Reader SM, Laland KN (Oxford Univ Press,
Oxford), pp 62 –82.
6. Reader SM, Morand-Ferron J, Flynn E (2016) Animal and human innovation: Novel
problems and novel solutions. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 371:371.
7. Wyles JS, Kundel JG, Wilson AC (1983) Birds, behavior, and anatomical evolution. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 80:4394–4397.
8. Keagy J, Savard J-F, Borgia G (2009) Male satin bowerbird problem-solving ability
predicts mating success. Anim Behav 78:809–817.
9. Cauchard L, Boogert NJ, Lefebvre L, Dubois F, Doligez B (2013) Problem-solving per-
formance is correlated with reproductive success in a wild bird population. Anim
Behav 85:19–26.
10. Whiten A, Ayala FJ, Feldman MW, Laland KN (2017) The extension of biology through
culture. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 114:7775–7781.
11. Reader SM, Laland KN (2003) Animal innovation: An introduction. Animal Innovation,
eds Reader SM, Laland KN (Oxford Univ Press, Oxford), pp 3 –35.
12. Ramsey G, Bastian ML, van Schaik C (2007) Animal innovation defined and oper-
ationalized. Behav Brain Sci 30:393–407.
13. van Schaik CP, et al. (2016) The reluctant innovator: Orangutans and the phylogeny of
creativity. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 371:371.
14. Fogarty L, Creanza N, Feldman MW (2015) Cultural evolutionary perspectives on
creativity and human innovation. Trends Ecol Evol 30:736–754.
15. Perry S (1996) Intergroup encounters in wild white-faced capuchins, Cebus capucinus.
Int J Primatol 17:309–330.
16. Reader SM, Laland KN (2001) Primate innovation: Sex, age, and social rank differ-
ences. Int J Primatol 22:787–805.
17. Lefebrvre L, et al. (1998) Feeding innovations and forebrain size in Australasian birds.
Behaviour 135:1077–1097.
18. Lefebrvre L, Whittle P, Lascaris E, Finkelstein A (1997) Feeding innovations and
forebrain size in birds. Anim Behav 53:549–560.
19. Boogert NJ, Reader SM, Hoppitt W, Laland KN (2008) The origin and spread of in-
novations in starlings. Anim Behav 75:1509–1518.
20. Thornton A, Samson J (2012) Innovative problem solving in wild meerkats. Anim
Behav 83:1459–1468.
21. Aplin LM, et al. (2015) Experimentally induced innovations lead to persistent culture
via conformity in wild birds. Nature 518:538–541.
22. Kendal RL, Coe RL, Laland KN (2005) Age differences in neophilia, exploration, and
innovation in family groups of callitrichid monkeys. Am J Primatol 66:167–188.
23. Russon AE (2003) Innovation and creativity in forest-living rehabilitant orangutans.
Animal Innovation, eds Reader SM, Laland KN (Oxford Univ Press, Oxford), pp 279 –306.
24. Whiten A, et al. (1999) Cultures in chimpanzees. Nature 399:682–685.
25. van Schaik CP, et al. (2003) Orangutan cultures and the evolution of material culture.
Science 299:102–105.
26. van Schaik CP, van Noordwijk MA, Wich SA (2006) Innovation in wild Bornean
orangutans ( Pongo pygmaeus wurmbii ). Behaviour 143:839–876.
27. Perry S, et al. (2003) Social conventions in wild white-faced capuchin monkeys: Evi-
dence for traditions in a neotropical primate. Curr Anthropol 44:241–268.
28. Koolhaas JM, et al. (1999) Coping styles in animals: Current status in behavior and
stress-physiology. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 23:925–935.
29. Kummer H, Goodall J (1985) Conditions of innovative behaviour in primates. Philos
Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 308:203–214.
30. Overington S, Morand-Ferron J, Boogert NJ, Lefebvre L (2009) Technical innovations
drive the relationship between innovativeness and residual brain size in birds. Anim
Behav 78:1001–1010.
31. Navarrete AF, Reader SM, Street SE, Whalen A, Laland KN (2016) The coevolution of
innovation and technical intelligence in primates. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci
371:371.
32. Stephan H, Bauchot R, Andy OJ (1970) Data on size of the brain and various brain
parts in insectivores and primates. The Primate Brain , eds Noback CR, Montagna W
(Appleton-Century-Crofts, New York), pp 289 –297.
33. Perry S, Ordoñez Jiménez JC (2006) The Effects of Food Size, Rarity, and Processing
Complexity on White-Faced Capuchins’ Visual Attention to Foraging Conspecifics,e d s
Hohmann G, Robbins M, Boesch C (Cambridge Univ Press, Cambridge, UK), pp 203–234.
34. Fragaszy DM, Visalberghi E, Fedigan LM (2004) The Complete Capuchin: The Biology
of the Genus Cebus (Cambridge Univ Press, Cambridge, UK).
35. Day RL, Coe RL, Kendal JR, Laland KN (2003) Neophilia, innovation and social learn-
ing: A study of intergeneric differences in callitrichid monkeys. Anim Behav 65:
559–571.
36. Lynch Alfaro JW, et al. (2012) Explosive Pleistocene range expansion leads to wide-
spread Amazonian sympatry between robust and gracile capuchin monkeys.JB i o g e o g r
39:272–288.
37. Rose L, et al. (2003) Interspecific interactions between white-faced capuchins (Cebus
capucinus) and other species: Preliminary data from three Costa Rican sites. Int J
Primatol 24:759–796.
38. Perry S, Manson JH (2008) Manipulative Monkeys: The Capuchins of Lomas Barbudal
(Harvard Univ Press, Cambridge, MA).
39. Sol D, Sayol F, Ducatez S, Lefebvre L (2016) The life-history basis of behavioural in-
novations. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 371:371.
40. Perry S (2012) The behavior of wild white-faced capuchins: Demography, life history,
social relationships, and communication. Adv Study Behav 44:135–181.
41. Perry S (2011) Social traditions and social learning in capuchin monkeys ( Cebus). Philos
Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 366:988–996.
42. Nishida T, Matsusaka T, McGrew WC (2009) Emergence, propagation or disappear-
ance of novel behavioral patterns in the habituated chimpanzees of Mahale: A re-
view. Primates 50:23–36.
43. Haslam M, et al. (2016) Pre-Columbian monkey tools. Curr Biol 26:R521–R522.
44. Gould SJ, Vrba ES (1982) Exaptation - a missing term in the science of form.
Paleobiology 8:4–15.
45. Zahavi A (1977) The testing of a bond. Anim Behav 25:246–247.
46. Russon AE, Kuncoro P, Ferisa A (2015) Tools for the trees: Orangutan arboreal tool use
and creativity. Animal Creativity and Innovation , eds Kaufman AB, Kaufman JC
(Elsevier, San Diego), pp 419 –455.
47. Beck SR, Williams C, Cutting N, Apperly IA, Chappell J (2016) Individual differences in
children’s innovative problem-solving are not predicted by divergent thinking or
executive functions. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 371:371.
48. Laland KN, van Bergen Y (2003) Experimental studies of innovation in the guppy.
Animal Innovation , eds Reader SM, Laland KN (Oxford Univ Press, New York), pp
155–173.
49. Frankie GW, Vinston SB, Newstrom LE, Barthell JF (1988) Nest site and habitat pref-
erences of Centris bees in the Costa Rican dry forest. Biotropica 20:301–310.
50. Perry S, Godoy I, Lammers W (2012) The Lomas Barbudal Monkey Project: Two de-
cades of research on Cebus capucinus . Long-Term Field Studies of Primates , eds
Kappeler P, Watts D (Springer, New York), pp 141 –165.
51. Russon A, Andrews K, Huss B (2007) Innovation and the grain problem. Behav Brain
Sci 30:423–433.
52. Neumann C, Kulik L (2014) EloRating: Animal Dominance Hierarchies by Elo-Rating.
R Package, Version 0.43. Available at https://cran.r-project.org/package=EloRating.
Accessed January 5, 2017.
53. McElreath R (2016) Statistical Rethinking: A Bayesian Course with Examples in R and
Stan (Chapman and Hall/CRC, New York).
54. Stan Development Team (2016) RStan: The R Interface to Stan. R package version
2.14.1. (R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna).
55. R Development Core Team (2013) R: A Language and Environment for Statistical
Computing (R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna).
Perry et al. PNAS | July 25, 2017 | vol. 114 | no. 30 | 7813
ANTHROPOLOGY COLLOQUIUM
PAPER
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 92.208.224.29 on August 11, 2026 from IP address 92.208.224.29.
