PDF PAGE 1
White-Faced Capuchin, Cebus capucinus imitator,
Hammerstone and Anvil Tool Use in Riparian Habitats
on Coiba Island, Panama
Claudio M. Monteza-Moreno 1,2,3,4 & Tamara Dogandžić5,6 & Kevin A. McLean 1,3 &
Pedro L. Castillo-Caballero3,7 & Zarluis Mijango-Ramos3,8 &
Evelyn Del Rosario-Vargas3,7 & Margaret C. Crofoot 1,2,3,9,10,11 &
Brendan J. Barrett 3,12,13
# Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2020
Introduction
Tool-aided extractive foraging is an impor tant element of the success of many dietary
generalists in resource-limited ecosystems. The study of primate tool use offers insight
into the possible form and function of tool use in early hominins, as well as related
ecological pressures. It informs us about instances of tool use where raw materials or sites
may not be preserved due to site degradation. It helps us map observable behavior onto
site accumulation and increases our understanding of taphonomic biases and site forma-
tion. While habitual tool use has been reported in all great apes and many robust
capuchins, it is rarer in other primates. Recently, island-living populations of long-tailed
macaques (Matrivijonodet al. 2007) and gracile capuchins (Barrettet al. 2018) have been
discovered to habitually use stone tools. The contrast of these tool-using insular popula-
tions relative to their mainland counterparts, and the heavy reliance on tool use in many
island-living birds (Tebbichet al. 2002), suggests that some aspect of island ecology such
as reduced predation, increased terrestrially, decreased dietary richness, increased eco-
logical stress, or increased niche breadth due to reduced heterospecific competition may
be conducive to the innovation, maintenance,and cultural transmission of tool use.
Although robust capuchins ( Sapajus sp.) are well documented tool users, gracile
capuchins (Cebus sp.), which diverged from their sister taxa ca. 6.5 mya, show little to
no reliance on tool use, despite well-documented evidence of other types of socially
learned traditions. The only known exception is a population of white-faced capuchins,
Cebus capucinus imitator, foraging on fruits and structurally protected gastropods and
crustaceans in coastal ecosystems on the Pacific island of Jicarón in Coiba National
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10764-020-00156-5
Handling Editor: Joanna M. Setchell.
* Brendan J. Barrett
bbarrett@ab.mpg.de
Extended author information available on the last page of the article
International Journal of Primatology (2020) 41:429–433
Published online: 22 May 2020

PDF PAGE 2
Park (CNP), Panama. Here we report a second population of stone-tool using white-
faced capuchins living on Coiba, the largest island in CNP.
Site Description
Coiba (53,582 ha) lies 30 km west of mainland Panama in the Pacific Ocean. This
biodiversity hotspot possesses a unique floristic composition, distributed among varied
habitat types. Islands in the Coiban archipelago have been isolated from the mainland
since the last glacial maximum 12,000 –18,000 years ago.
We first observed evidence of hammerstone and anvil tool use by capuchins on the
northwest of Coiba in March 2019. During an ongoing survey of tool use across the
archipelago, we observed river cobbles that had been used as hammerstones resting
upon stone anvils in shallow riffles in the middle of the river and along the river bank.
At nine tool sites, we observed remains of freshwater snails under hammerstones and
lying on and alongside stone anvils (Fig. 1a). Tool sites were found in clusters (two or
three sites separated by <5 m) as well as in isolated sites. Distances between tool sites
ranged from ca. 25 to 100 m. In April 2019, we counted 10 tool sites on a ca.1 - k m
transect of riverbank that lies 620 –1000 m from the coast. In July 2019, we observed
evidence of capuchins using hammerstones to processBactris sp. palm fruits ca. 800 m
Fig. 1 (a) Hammerstone resting on anvil. Fragments ofPomacea shells lie on top of the anvil and alongside it
in the river and riverbank. (b) Fragments of Bactris palm fruits under and around a hammerstone on a stone
anvil in a stream bed. (c) Adult male capuchin ingesting food he processed with hammerstone on stone anvil
while conspecifics observe intently. (d) Adult male capuchin using a hammerstone on a wooden anvil to
process unidentified food items on the coast. Photo credits: (a) Christian Ziegler; (b) CMM; (c, d) ZMR.
Monteza-Moreno C.M. et al.430

PDF PAGE 3
from the coast (Fig. 1b). Later we observed from a boat an adult male capuchin using
hammerstones to process unidentified coastal resources accompanied by two conspe-
cifics ca. 1300 m from the riparian site (Fig. 1c, d).
Conclusions
This is only the second description of hammerstone and anvil tool use in Cebus despite
numerous decades-long habituated studies across their range. The only other known
tool-using population is a single group 39 km southwest on Jicarón, the second largest
island within CNP (Barrett et al. 2018). Our discovery of another population of stone-
tool using capuchins on a second island in the Coiba Archipelago suggests that at least
two independent innovations of this behavior presumably occurred on the islands of
Coiba and Jicarón since their isolation from each other and the mainland 12,000 –
18,000 years ago. Although no dispersal events are known between the islands, this
should be interpreted cautiously; Coiba and Jicarón are separated by 6.5 km at their
closest point. This observation also supports the hypothesis that some aforementioned
aspect(s) of island ecology favor the evolution and spread of tool use.
Despite significant camera trap surveys since March 2017 (see Barrett et al .
2018), we have observed stone tool use only in two geographically restricted
areas of Coiba and Jicarón. The vast majority of capuchins on these islands do
not appear to use stone tools, despite having access to all of the materials
required to do so. Different groups across CNP in similar ecological conditions
process identical resources with (Barrett et al . 2018) and without (Méndez-
Carvajal and Valdés-Díaz 2017 ) hammerstone and anvil tool use; this is
consistent with stone tool use being a lo calized cultural tradition. Further
targeted surveys on ecologically plausible sites for tool use in Coiba, and an
understanding of intra- and intergroup social interactions, are necessary to
explain the absence of tool use in the majority of capuchin groups in CNP.
The presence of primate stone tool use along streambeds is comparable to early
hominin tool use locations in river beds or streams. In Jicaron, seasonal flooding affects
site preservation in stream beds. Understanding formation of primate tool-use sites in
conditions in which preservation is unlikely can provide us with testable hypotheses
about the early hominin tool-use behavior and the visibility and preservation of the
associated archeological record (Panger et al. 2002).
Unlike on Jicarón, we have observed tool use up to 1 km inland on Coiba.
This new description on Coiba suggests that shallow, fast-moving streams
further inland might be ideal areas to target when searching for new popula-
tions of tool-using primates. Both sto ne materials made available by stream
flow and structurally protected inverteb rates are abundant in tumultuous, ripar-
ian environments. This discovery also suggests that structurally protected re-
sources found in streambeds and along rocky intertidal areas are equally
important areas to further explore the breadth and patterning of Cebus tool
use. Currently, we do not know if these coastal and riparian hammerstone and
anvil tool sites on Coiba have been used by single or multiple capuchin groups.
Future explorations to the site and camera trapping will be important to resolve
if this tradition is confined to a single group or more widely spread.
White-Faced Capuchin, Cebus capucinus imitator, Hammerstone and... 431

PDF PAGE 4
Acknowledgements This research was funded by an L. S. B. Leakey Foundation grant awarded to BJB as
well as funds from the Max Planck Institute. It was also supported by a Packard Foundation Fellowship (2016-
65130), a grant from the National Science Foundation (NSF BCS 1514174), and the Alexander von Humboldt
Foundation in the framework of the Alexander von Humboldt Professorship endowed by the Federal Ministry
of Education and Research awarded to MCC. Support was also provided by the Center for the Advanced
Study of Collective Behavior at the University of Konstanz, DFG Centre of Excellence 2117 (ID: 422037984).
CMM is funded by SENACYT, scholarship program number BIDP-2017-2018. This research was conducted
under Ministerio de Ambiente, Panamá, scientific permit no. SC/A-23-17 and corresponding renewals and
addenda. We thank the editor and two anonymous reviewers for their feedback on this manuscript.
Authors’ Contributions All authors conducted fieldwork. BJB, CMM, MCC, and TD wrote the manu-
script; other authors provided editorial advice.
References
Barrett, B. J., Monteza-Moreno, C. M., Dogand žić, T., Zwyns, N., Ibañez, A., & Crofoot, M. C. (2018).
Habitual stone-tool-aided extractive foraging in white-faced capuchins, Cebus capucinus. Royal Society
Open Science, 5(8), 181002.
Malaivijitnond, S., Lekprayoon, C., Tandavanittj, N., Panha, S., Cheewatham, C., & Hamada, Y. (2007).
Stone-tool usage by Thai long-tailed macaques (Macaca fascicularis). American Journal of Primatology,
69(2), 227–233.
Méndez-Carvajal, P. G., & Valdés-Díaz, S. (2017). Use of anvils and other feeding behaviors observed in
Cebus imitator, Coiba Island, Panama. Tecnociencia, 19(1), 5–18.
Panger, M. A., Brooks, A. S., Richmond, B. G., & Wood, B. (2002). Older than the Oldowan? Rethinking the
emergence of hominin tool use. Evolutionary Anthropology, 11(6), 235–245.
Tebbich, S., Taborsky, M., Fessl, B., & Dvorak, M. (2002). The ecology of tool-use in the woodpecker finch
(Cactospiza pallida). Ecology Letters, 5(5), 656–664.
Ethical Note No animal care and use protocol was required for this study. The authors declare that
they have no conflict of interest.
Affiliations
Claudio M. Monteza-Moreno 1,2,3,4 & Tamara Dogandžić5,6 & Kevin A. McLean 1,3 &
Pedro L. Castillo-Caballero3,7 & Zarluis Mijango-Ramos3,8 & Evelyn
Del Rosario-Vargas3,7 & Margaret C. Crofoot 1,2,3,9,10,11 & Brendan J. Barrett 3,12,13
1 Department of Anthropology, University of California, Davis, CA, USA
2 Animal Behavior Graduate Group, University of California, Davis, CA, USA
3 Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute, Balboa, Ancón, Republic of Panama
4 Estación Científica COIBA-AIP, Ciudad del Saber, Clayton, Panamá, Republic of Panama
5 Department of Human Evolution, Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology, Leipzig,
Germany
6 Department of Anthropology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA
7 Facultad de Ciencias Naturales, Exactas y Tecnología, Universidad de Panamá, Panamá, Republic of
Panama
Monteza-Moreno C.M. et al.432

PDF PAGE 5
8 Department of Plant Biology, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL, USA
9 Department for the Ecology of Animal Societies, Max Planck Institute of Animal Behavior, Konstanz,
Germany
10 Department of Biology, University of Konstanz, Konstanz, Germany
11 Center for the Advanced Study of Collective Behavior, University of Konstanz, Konstanz, Germany
12 Cognitive and Cultural Ecology Group, Max Planck Institute of Animal Behavior, Radolfzell, Germany
13 Department of Human Behavior, Ecology, and Culture, Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary
Anthropology, Leipzig, Germany
White-Faced Capuchin, Cebus capucinus imitator, Hammerstone and... 433