PDF PAGE 1
royalsocietypublishing.org/journal/rsos
Research
Cite this article: Goldsborough Z, Crofoot MC,
Alavi SE, Del Rosario-Vargas E, Garza SF,
Tiedeman K, Barrett BJ. 2023 Coupling of coastal
activity with tidal cycles is stronger in tool-using
capuchins ( Cebus capucinus imitator ). R. Soc.
Open Sci. 10: 230355.
https://doi.org/10.1098/rsos.230355
Received: 21 March 2023
Accepted: 1 September 2023
Subject Category:
Organismal and evolutionary biology
Subject Areas:
behaviour/ecology/evolution
Keywords:
tool use, tidal cycles, foraging, activity patterns,
islands
Authors for correspondence:
Zoë Goldsborough
e-mail: zgoldsborough@ab.mpg.de
Brendan J. Barrett
e-mail: brendan.barrett@uni-konstanz.de
Electronic supplementary material is available
online at https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.c.
6837151.
Coupling of coastal activity
with tidal cycles is stronger
in tool-using capuchins
(Cebus capucinus imitator )
Zoë Goldsborough 1,2,3,4, Margaret C. Crofoot 1,2,3,4,
Shauhin E. Alavi 1,2, Evelyn Del Rosario-Vargas 4,
Sylvia F. Garza 1,2, Kate Tiedeman 1 and
Brendan J. Barrett 2,1,3,4
1Department for the Ecology of Animal Societies, Max Planck Institute of Animal Behavior,
Konstanz, Germany
2Department of Biology, and 3Center for the Advanced Study of Collective Behavior,
University of Konstanz, Konstanz, Germany
4Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute, Ancon, Panama
ZG, 0000-0001-8198-5742; KT, 0000-0001-9647-0370;
BJB, 0000-0002-2725-2385
Terrestrial mammals exploiting coastal resources must cope
with the challenge that resource availability and accessibility
fluctuate with tidal cycles. Tool use can improve foraging
efficiency and provide access to structurally protected
resources that are otherwise unavailable (e.g. molluscs and
fruits). To understand how variable accessibility of valuable
resources shapes behavioural patterns, and whether tool
use aids in the efficient exploitation of intertidal resources,
we compared the relationship between tidal cycles and
activity patterns of tool-using versus non-tool-using groups
of white-faced capuchin monkeys on Jicarón Island in Coiba
National Park, Panama. Although tool use on Jicarón is
localized to a small stretch of coast (approx. 1 km), all coastal
groups forage on intertidal resources. Using more than 5
years of camera trap data at varying distances from the coast,
we found that capuchins on Jicarón showed increased coastal
activity during specific parts of the tidal cycle, and that this
relationship differed between tool-using and non-tool-using
groups, as well as between seasons. Activity patterns of tool-
using capuchins were more strongly and consistently tied to
tidal cycles compared with non-tool-users, indicating that
tool use might allow for more efficient exploitation of tidal
resources. Our findings highlight the potential of tool use to
aid niche expansion.
© 2023 The Authors. Published by the Royal Society under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/, which permits
unrestricted use, provided the original author and source are credited.

PDF PAGE 2
1. Introduction
Animals that are dietary generalists are buffered against the negative consequences of environmental change
and fluctuating resource availability [1]. Dietary generalists have been shown to be more innovative and
better at spatial reasoning than specialist congeners, helping them to access patchy resources [2,3], and
have also fared better than specialists in the face of anthropogenic change [4]. Maritime mammals ( sensu
[5]) are one example of dietary generalists: these are populations of mammalian foragers who exploit
resources in the intertidal zones, despite intertidal areas being an unlikely selective pressure in their
evolutionary past, and who typically also forage in other habitats.
While all animals must deal with spatio-temporal variability in choosing when and where to
forage, terrestrial foragers exploiting intertidal resources face additional challenges. Tidal cycles are
asynchronously cyclical: tidal peaks occur predictably , but the timing of low and high tides shifts daily
and the magnitude of tidal change is affected by a myriad of interacting processes. Resource accessibility
also varies depending on season and weather. Different prey species may show intra-annual variability
in abundance due to migration or breeding patterns [6,7]. Prey accessibility can be limited by sunlight
and temperature, which can heat substrates to greater than 45°C and impact tidal pool salinity causing
prey to conceal themselves or move towards the ocean [8 –10]. Further, the intertidal zone in tropical
regions is often exposed and hot, which potentially puts individuals with reduced adaptation to cope
with hot substrates at risk of thermal stress when traversing the intertidal zone. Although a
taxonomically diverse set of mammalian taxa are known to exploit intertidal resources (e.g. primates
[11,12], carnivores [13 –15] and rodents [16]), it is unclear how this variable accessibility of valuable
resources affects the daily activity patterns of these maritime mammals.
1.1. Tool use improves efficiency of intertidal foraging
The importance of intertidal resources and the extent to which maritime mammals alter their activity
patterns to tidal cycles may depend on their ability to exploit the resources in these dynamic habitats.
Intertidal resources, such as marine invertebrates and fruits with ocean dispersed seeds, are physically
protected and therefore require time-consuming processing (e.g. bivalves, crabs). One way in which
maritime mammals could exploit intertidal resources more efficiently and access resources that are
otherwise inaccessible to them is by using tools. Tool use facilitates more efficient resource consumption
through faster processing, and provides access to structurally protected foods [17], and as such allows
animals to expand their effective environment. Rocky intertidal areas exposed by low tides provide a
wealth of anvil and hammerstone material, in the form of bedrock, driftwood and smooth stones.
A behaviour is considered tool use when an animal manipulates an object that is not part of their own
body in order to reach a useful outcome [18,19]. Examples of animal tool use in foraging contexts are
widespread, ranging from chimpanzees ( Pan troglodytes) using sticks for termite fishing [20] and robust
capuchins (Sapajus spp.) using stone tools to crack nuts [21,22], to dolphins ( Tursiops sp.) protecting their
rostra with sponges while foraging on the seafloor [23] and New-Caledonian crows ( Corvus moneduloides)
crafting and using hooked as well as unhooked twig tools to forage on embedded insects [24].
1.2. Maritime mammals face challenges in timing foraging with tidal cycles
How intertidal foraging impacts a maritime mammal ’s behaviour depends on the importance of these
resources in their diets. Carlton & Hodder [5] distinguish between opportunistic and obligate foraging in
the intertidal zone. Opportunistic omnivores can exploit the intertidal zone whenever it is advantageous
to them. By contrast, obligate reliance on intertidal resources can be a result of seasonal or systematic
impoverishment of terrestrial resources which drives maritime mammals to intertidal resources as an
essential addition to their diet [5], making intertidal resources a type of fallback food [25,26].
Opportunistic exploitation of the intertidal zone has different effects on maritime mammals ’ activity
patterns. An example of opportunistic maritime mammals are Japanese macaques ( Macaca fuscata), who
feed on seafood and only show intertidal foraging linked to tidal cycles in months when terrestrial
resources are scarce [27]. By contrast, black legged kittiwakes ( Rissa tridactyla)—who are more obligate
maritime foragers as they systematically rely on intertidal resources —choose to forage in the intertidal
zone and leave their chicks unattended when low tide overlaps with their nesting period [28].
Furthermore, island-living arctic foxes ( Alopex lagopus ), whose diet is dominated by fish caught in
tidal pools, shape their daily activity pattern around the tides: they forage at low tide and sleep at high
royalsocietypublishing.org/journal/rsosR. Soc. Open Sci.10: 230355
2

PDF PAGE 3
tide [29]. Animals that exploit resources in the intertidal zone may thus benefit from adjusting their daily
activity to the tidal cycles.
1.3. The role of tool use in intertidal exploitation
Tool use might aid intertidal exploitation, as many intertidal resources are structurally protected (e.g. snails,
bivalves, coconuts). An example of animals using tools to forage in intertidal zones with greater efficiency
are bearded capuchins ( Sapajus apella and Sapajus libidinosus ) in mangroves. These capuchins exploit
intertidal resources, including crabs and snails, with and without tools [30]. Notably , while crabs can be
eaten without using tools, it appears that snails can only be consumed by tool-using capuchins. Island-
living Burmese long-tailed macaques ( Macaca fascicularis aurea ) exploit both terrestrial resources ( palm
nuts) and tidal resources exposed at low tide, such as oysters, by using stone tools [11]. Intertidal
resources may be of differing importance to tool-using and non-tool-using maritime mammals, as tool
use can provide access to novel foraging niches [31] or otherwise inaccessible items [32]. Thus, tool-using
maritime mammals may access more marine prey items than non-tool-using mammals. Alternatively ,
tool-users might have less need for intertidal resources than non-tool-users as they can access more
nutrient-rich foods inland as well. In this case, non-tool-using maritime mammals might exploit
intertidal resources to a greater extent as they have fewer terrestrial resource options.
1.4. Coiban capuchins are tool-using and non-tool-using maritime mammals
White-faced capuchins in Coiba National Park, Panama (hereafter Coiban capuchins), have been reported
to habitually conduct first-order (e.g. pounding of coconuts on anvils [33]) and second-order tool use
(e.g. hammerstone and anvil stone tool use [34,35]). This habitual tool use behaviour provides the
opportunity to explore: (i) if capuchins adjust their patterns of activity to coincide with the tides and
(ii) whether this relationship differs between tool-using and non-tool-using capuchins. White-faced
capuchins are exploratory dietary generalists who rely heavily on extractive foraging to access
structurally protected resources in varied neotropical forests [36 –38]. Many of these extractive foraging
behaviours are socially learned [39 –41]. Despite decades of studies across multiple field sites [42,43],
habitual stone tool use by white-faced capuchins has only been documented in at least one group of
capuchins on the island of Coiba [35] and one group on the island of Jicarón [34] in Coiba National
Park, located approximately 30 km off the Pacific coast of Panama. Recently , stone tool use was also
described in an urban population of Cebus albifrons in Ecuador [44]. Coiban capuchins use
hammerstone and anvil tool use to access a variety of food items, including sea almonds ( Terminalia
catappa), coconuts ( Cocos nucifera ), Halloween crabs ( Gecarcinus quadratus ), palm fruits ( Bactris major
and Astrocaryum spp.), hermit crabs ( Coenobita compressus ), nerite snails ( Nerita sp.) and other
freshwater molluscs. Coiban capuchins differ from well-studied mainland populations in showing
increased terrestrial activity , likely due to the lack of mammalian predators on the island [45] and live
at high population densities [34,46]. Additionally , both Coiba and Jicarón have lower plant richness
than similar mainland ecosystems [47,48]. On Jicarón, this tool use tradition is highly localized along
the coast and mostly limited to one social group [34], despite similar ecological circumstances and no
physical barriers between the tool-using capuchin group and other groups of non-tool-using
capuchins on the island. Further, both tool-using and non-tool-using capuchins on Jicarón are
maritime mammals —that forage on (structurally protected) marine prey items along the coast and in
the intertidal zone, such as crabs and snails [34] (electronic supplementary material, video S1). Coiba
National Park experiences mixed tides; two low tides of different heights occur every approximately
12.5 h. Thus, the timing of the low tide(s) experienced by capuchins shifts approximately 30 min each
day (see electronic supplementary material, figure S1 for the timing of low tides for one month).
As such, visits to the intertidal zone at a repeatable time each day are insufficient for capuchins to
regularly exploit coastal resources.
Here, we investigate how the pattern of Coiban capuchins ’ activity varies with shifting tidal cycles, by
using camera trap data collected from March 2017 to January 2023. We compare how the patterns of
activity , relative to distance from the coast and tidal cycles, differ between tool-users and non-tool-
users. As exploitation of intertidal resources likely has a seasonal component (e.g. red deer [49] and
baboons [12]), we examine differences in tidal patterns for tool-using and non-tool-using capuchins
between the wet and the dry season. Lastly , capuchin activity at the coast can be affected by diurnal
activity and space use patterns, which are likely shaped by temperature and sleeping site location. To
gain a more complete picture of capuchins ’ activity at the coast, we also consider intra-diel capuchin
royalsocietypublishing.org/journal/rsosR. Soc. Open Sci.10: 230355
3

PDF PAGE 4
activity (i.e. are capuchins more likely to be at the coast at a specific time of day). By jointly examining
these questions in a system with tool-using and non-tool-using capuchins, we provide a first exploration
of the relationship between tool use and tidal cycles for a non-human animal in a coastal habitat.
This provides insights into how an ecological generalist copes with complicated cycles of resource
availability in a non-typical habitat, and provides a much needed comparative study to help
understand potential hominin behaviour in coastal environments where tool use is unlikely to be
preserved [50,51].
2. Methods
2.1. Subjects and site
Coiba National Park consists of nine islands and over 100 islets located off the Pacific coast of Veraguas
Province, Panama. It is a designated UNESCO World Heritage site with endemic animal and plant
species [52]. White-faced capuchins ( Cebus capucinus imitator ) live on the islands of Coiba (50 314 ha),
Jicarón (2002 ha) and Rancheriá (125 ha). These islands are estimated to have been geographically
isolated from mainland Panama for 14 000 –18 000 years [53]. The terrestrial mammalian communities
in Coiba National Park are depauperate in comparison to forests on the mainland, and mammalian
predators are entirely absent. Coiba and Jicarón were used as a penal colony from 1919 until 2004,
prior to which the islands were inhabited by indigenous people from 250 CE until about the sixteenth
century [54]. In recent years, only the island of Coiba and Rancheriá see constant human occupation
at two research stations and a police station; the other islands (including Jicarón) are largely
undisturbed by humans in recent centuries [34]. Average annual temperature in Coiba National Park
is around 26°C. Rainfall varies seasonally. In the dry season (mid-December to mid-April), there is
less than 60 mm of precipitation, while in the wet season there is over 3000 mm of precipitation [55].
Stone tool use on Jicarón has been documented at three types of sites, distinguished by the degree of
accumulation of debris and tools due to activity intensity and site erasure [34]: (i) elusive sites with low
to no accumulation, such as the intertidal zone where debris is washed away , (ii) sites in streambeds,
with low to medium accumulation due to more sporadic tool use, and (iii) high accumulation sites —
referred to as ‘anvils’ from here on out —further away from streambeds, where large amounts of debris
and tools can accumulate over time as capuchins habitually use tools. Since the start of data collection on
Jicarón in 2017, habitual tool use at high accumulation anvil sites has only been observed to occur along
an approximately 1 km stretch of coast, likely occupied by a single group of capuchins as documented
by camera trap data. In 2022, in-person observations confirmed the occurrence of tool use in the
intertidal zone by the two groups neighbouring the approximately 1 km stretch of coast (C. Monteza-
Moreno, personal communication 2023). However, extensive camera trapping and surveys of the coast
and in riparian areas yielded no evidence of tool use (both at high accumulation anvil sites and
streambeds) outside of this stretch of coast. Therefore, we refer to the other surveyed groups on the
island as non-tool-using groups.
2.2. Data collection and processing
2.2.1. Data collection
We analysed images and videos collected using unbaited camera traps on the island of Jicarón between
25 March 2017 and 24 January 2023 (with a gap in data collection in 2020 due to the COVID pandemic) in
11 deployments of about approximately four months (three to six months). Both still (Reconyx Hyperfire
HC600 & HF2X) and video (Reconyx Ultrafire XR6 & XP9) camera traps were used. Camera traps are not
fully non-invasive, as they are visually incongruent with the surroundings, and produce sounds or light
which may disturb animals (and some individuals/species more than others) [56]. We purchased
infrared rather than white flash camera traps to minimize disturbance to the animals.
Still-image camera traps recorded 10 images per trigger event without any between-trigger delays
(approx. 1 s between images). Video cameras recorded over a 24-h period and captured one image and a
dynamic video per trigger, which means that the camera trap stops recording after 3 s of inactivity , and
retriggers if additional movement is detected within 27 s. This results in videos of varying lengths, with
a maximum length of 30 s (however, we deployed two video cameras with a static video length of 30 s
per trigger). We surveyed 61 camera sites within the range of the Jicarón tool-using group, of which
royalsocietypublishing.org/journal/rsosR. Soc. Open Sci.10: 230355
4

PDF PAGE 5
11 targeted anvil sites, 26 were placed at untargeted locations in the streambeds and forest interior and 24
were placed as a 100-m spaced grid. We also surveyed 43 other camera sites in non-tool use areas on Jicarón,
of which 18 were placed at untargeted locations, and 25 in a 100-m spaced grid comparable to the one in the
tool-using group’s range.
We can reliably identify most members of the tool-using group (due to their unique tool-
using behaviour and increased sampling and coding efforts), allowing us to be confident about
which cameras were placed in the tool-using group range. For the non-tool-using capuchins, based on
co-occurrence of identifiable individuals we are confident that the 25 grid cameras all capture one
non-tool-using group. However, the 18 untargeted cameras capture multiple non-tool-using groups
due to their spread across the island (see electronic supplementary material, tables S1 and S2
for details on camera trap deployments). Table 1 details our estimates of size and composition of the
tool-using group and non-tool-using group sampled by the grid cameras.
In total, 137 cameras (117 stills and 20 videos) were deployed during the accumulated sampling period
at 104 sites. Out of these deployments, 89 had a single sampling period. The remaining 15 sites were
repeatedly sampled (ranging from 2 to 6 deployments in the same location). Average duration of
sampling nights per camera was 145.30 (range 9 –260), totalling 12 748 sampling nights for the tool-using
group and 7152 nights for non-tool-using groups. Camera traps were deployed at various distances from
the coast (meaning the coastal vegetation boundary , for more information see below), and grid cameras
were placed further inland than other cameras (for the tool-using group non-grid cameras 0.8 m –140.4
m, grid cameras 11.7 m –328.3 m; for non-tool-using groups non-grid cameras 0.5 m –39.2 m and grid
cameras 6.1 m –469.7 m). Few camera traps were placed on the beach directly targeting the intertidal
zone due to challenges in mounting (i.e. tree availability and seawater) and vandalism.
2.2.2. Coding of images and data processing
Still-images were compiled into sequences based on the time between triggers: all bursts of images triggered
less than 30 s apart were considered part of the same ‘sequence’. Each video of 30 s was considered a single
sequence. All sequences were coded in Agouti, an online platform for archiving and annotating camera trap
data [57]. In each sequence, we identified the animal species visible and the number of individuals per
species. For analyses, we only considered sequences with capuchins in them ( n = 22 185). We did not
include any 0 ’s in our models because an absence of capuchin detections does not necessarily mean an
absence of capuchins (e.g. camera traps do not always trigger fast enough to capture a travelling animal).
Our analyses thus focus on comparing differences in patterns of detection rates in capuchin activity
rather than the absence or the presence of capuchins. Further, our focus is not to estimate activity
patterns as is commonly done for multiple species, using timestamps from camera trap pictures [58 –60].
Instead we are modeling the non-random, spatio-temporal patterns of animal detection, which we refer
to as capuchin activity. We excluded deployment set-up and collection days from all analyses, as on these
days the human presence may have altered capuchin behaviour.
Tidal data, i.e. timing of low and high tides, were obtained from http://www.tides4fishing.com for
Cébaco island, which lies approximately 90 km from Jicarón, and is used locally by fishermen in the area
and digitized into a .csv using the software Tabula (https://tabula.technology). As the intertidal zone is
maximally exposed around the peak of low tide, we calculated the time difference between the initial
Table 1. Estimated average group size and composition of the tool-using group and non-tool-using group sampled by grid
cameras throughout our sampling period. Estimates are based on a) identi ﬁable individuals, b) the maximum number of
capuchins observed in a sequence, and c) the maximum number of individuals of a particular age-sex class observed together.
No exact numbers are known because of the nature of data collection via camera trapping and ﬂuctuation throughout our
sampling period.
estimated numbers tool-using group non-tool-using group
adult females 5 –65 –6
adult males 5 –65 –6
subadults 2 –42 –3
juveniles 6 –10 7 –9
total 20 –25 19 –23
royalsocietypublishing.org/journal/rsosR. Soc. Open Sci.10: 230355
5

PDF PAGE 6
timestamp of each photo sequence and the time of the nearest low tide. These values ranged from
approximately −6 to 6 h, with 0 indicating the peak of low tide and around −6 and 6 the peaks of
high tides. Negative values indicate times where the tide is receding, positive values indicate that the
tides are approaching the coast.
We calculated the distance of each camera site to the coast by taking the distance from a camera ’s GPS
point to the nearest coastal vegetation boundary. To determine the coastal vegetation boundaries, we
used high-resolution satellite imagery from Planet Labs [61]. We used 3 m resolution, four-band
surface reflectance Planet imagery from 29 January 2021. On this date, cloud cover was near zero and
the image was collected at low tide. We used a normalized difference vegetation index threshold of
0.7 to determine the boundary between coastal vegetation and sand or rock. Data were processed in
Google Earth Engine and using the terra package in R [62]. We split the data into dry and wet season
based on known rainfall and temperature differences, with the months December –April being part of
the dry season and May –November being the wet season.
2.3. Statistical analyses
We used hierarchical generalized additive models (GAMs) fit using Bayesian regression modelling with
Stan via the ‘brm’ function in the brms package v. 2.17.0 [63]. All statistical analyses were done in R
v. 4.2.2 [64]. GAMs are extensions of generalized linear models that allow estimation of nonlinear
patterns in data without any prior knowledge of the shape of the expected relationship. Inference is
done on the basis of a sum of smooth functions, which are penalized regression splines [65,66]. GAMs
are especially useful for seasonal and cyclical data where relationships are unlikely to be linear, such
as capuchin activity and tidal cycles. While GAMs are well suited for identifying nonlinear patterns in
data, they require caution when used for forecasting based on new data [65].
We fit five different GAMs: three including capuchin activity in relation to time to nearest low tide
and two considering diurnal activity. For the tidal models, we ran an initial model (model MT_1) on
all of the data comparing the effect of tidal cycles on activity between tool-using and non-tool-using
groups. Then we considered differences in tidal pattern between the dry and wet season for the tool-
using (MT_2) and non-tool-using groups (MT_3) separately. The diurnal activity GAMs examined
how spatial spread of activity patterns varies depending on the time of day , also separately for the
tool-using (MD_1) and non-tool-using groups (MD_2).
2.3.1. GAM specifications
To compare tool-users to non-tool-users (model MT_1), we fit a Poisson GAM. Our outcome variable was
the count of unique capuchins annotated in a sequence. For predictors, we estimated the effects of
(i) temporal difference from nearest low tide, (ii) distance of camera trap from coast, and (iii) an
interaction of temporal difference from nearest low tide and camera distance from coast. We used tensor
product smooths for this interaction, which allows one to model responses of the outcome variable to
interactions of multiple variables with different units.
We used a cyclic cubic spline for time to nearest low tide, as 6 h before a given low tide matches up to
6 h after the previous low tide. We also estimated varying smooths of this tensor product for the tool-
using and non-tool-using groups, and included if a group were tool-users (1) or non-tool-users (0) as
an index variable. As we have uneven sampling between the tool-using and non-tool-using groups,
we include a global tensor smoother for distance to coast and time to low tide, and a tensor smoother
considering the tool-using group and non-tool-using groups separately as smooth deviations from that
overall surface. We included camera trap location as a random effect.
Secondly , to assess seasonality in a possible tidal effect, we fit two more GAMs with the same
structure: one for the tool-using group (MT_2) and one for the non-tool-using groups (MT_3). In these
models, we estimated varying smooths of the tensor product for the wet and the dry season, and
included the season, wet/dry , as a fixed effect.
Lastly , to investigate the relationship between coastal activity and temperature, we used time of day
as a proxy , since temperature varies depending on the time of the day. We used a proxy rather than the
actual temperature as camera trap measurements of ambient temperature are unreliable and we lack
independent measurements (e.g. from a weather station) to validate them. As such, we fit the same
structure GAMs as for the seasonality question, one for the tool-using group (MD_1) and one for
the non-tool-using group (MD_2). However, we used hour of the day (from 0 to 23) rather than time
to low tide.
royalsocietypublishing.org/journal/rsosR. Soc. Open Sci.10: 230355
6

PDF PAGE 7
We z-transformed time to low tide, distance from coast, and hour of the day to improve
computational speed, model fit, and ease parameter interpretation. All models were fit with mild
regularizing priors, using Normal(0,2) for the intercept and estimates, and exponential(1) for standard
deviations. We performed a prior predictive simulation to visualize the priors. We ran the final
models with three chains, each having 4000 iterations, including a warm-up period of 2000 iterations
per chain. Our model was stable with large effective sample sizes (Bulk_ESS and Tail_ESS over 1000
for nearly all estimates) and Rhat values smaller than 1.01. For all models, Pareto k estimates were
below 0.5. We used the posterior predictive check function to visually assess model fit and confirm
our choice of priors. For full model specifications and details, see the electronic supplementary
materials and associated reproducible R code.
2.3.2. Assessing reliability of model estimates
Tensor smooth products were visualized into two-dimensional heatmaps (filled contour plots) using the
ggplot2 package v. 3.3.6 [67]. To assist in interpretation of these patterns, we used the ‘method of finite
differences’ to estimate the first derivative of the spline, which allows for identification of periods of
change along a fitted spline. Previous implementations of the method of finite differences on GAMs,
were done on single-dimension splines in a frequentist context [68,69]. We have built upon this by
developing a Bayesian extension of this method for two-dimensional interaction splines [70]. To
accomplish this, we first used the ‘posterior_smooths’ function in ‘brms’ to obtain posterior predictions.
Then we recomputed posterior predictions after adding or subtracting a small offset, 0.001, for both
predictors in the tensor smooth. As predictors were z-transformed, 0.001 represents 1/1000th of 1 s.d. for
each predictor, a comparable change in both predictors despite their different scales. The first derivative
of the two-dimensional tensor smooth can be approximated as follows:
f
td(t,d) ~ f(t þ epsh, d þ epsk) /C0 f(t þ epsh, d /C0 epsk) /C0 f(t /C0 epsh, d þ epsk ) þ f(t /C0 epsh, d /C0 epsk )
4/C3 epsh/C3 epsk
, ð2:1Þ
where t and d represent the two predictors in the tensor smooth interaction (e.g. time to low tide and
distance to coast). Here epsh and epsk represent the small offset that is added or subtracted to each
estimate. With the first derivative approximation, we could identify regions of the two-dimensional
surface where the slope was non-flat in all four directions represented in the numerator of equation (2.1).
If 89% of the posterior uncertainty interval of the first derivative was on one side of 0, then we
interpreted it as reliable evidence for a non-zero rate of change. This conservative criterion allows us to
identify areas of the two-dimensional surface of model estimates where we have the most evidence that:
(i) the model reliably predicts a nonlinear change (ii) this change is consistently (greater than 89% of the
time) in the same direction even with small perturbations to the model. Contourplots showing
the proportion of the derivatives above and below zero are provided as electronic supplementary
material (figures S4, S7, S10, S12 and S14).
All data and code used for analyses in this paper are available via https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.
8129505 [71].
3. Results
Capuchins live at high densities on Jicarón, but use different locations with varying intensity. We
observed capuchins at least once on every camera trap within each deployment (sequences with
capuchins range: 4 –1346). On average, 2 ± 1.51 (range 1 –22) capuchins were observed per sequence.
All models indicated considerable variation between camera locations (see electronic supplementary
material, figures S2, S5 and S8 for model estimates of capuchin activity per camera location).
3.1. A guide to interpreting two-dimensional heatmaps of derivatives
We present the best predictions of our model in figure 1. We guide the reader through how to interpret these
types of graphs using figure 1 as an example. In these figures, the y-axis represents the distance from the
coast in metres. The x-axis represents hours until and after nearest low tide, where 0 indicates low tide
and the boundaries of the graph around −6 and 6 represent high tides. Observations are indicated in the
margins of the axes by translucent grey hash marks. In these heatmaps, colour reflects capuchin activity:
0 is the mean number of capuchins from z-score transformed raw data. Light colours indicate a greater
royalsocietypublishing.org/journal/rsosR. Soc. Open Sci.10: 230355
7

PDF PAGE 8
number of capuchins than the mean, while dark colours indicate a lower number of capuchins. For example,
in figure 1 b, the orange peak at all distances around low tide (0) indicates highest capuchin activity.
The small dark purple trough at 2 h after low tide indicates lowest capuchin activity. We use colour
saturation to represent evidence for a reliable nonlinear change in the number of capuchins as
represented in equation (2.1). Colour-saturated areas have more than 89% of the derivative being non-
zero, indicating that estimated changes in capuchin activity are consistently in the same direction (i.e.
positive or negative). In figure 1, no areas are colour-saturated, which shows that we do not see strong,
reliable evidence for changes as defined by our 89% criterium. Electronic supplementary material, figure
S4 shows exactly how much support there is for specific areas of the two-dimensional heatmap by
estimating the mass of the derivative of the posterior on either side of zero. This shows the area with
most support is from low tide until 4 h after at less than 50 m from the coast for tool-users (the lighter
area in figure 1 a). However, the proportion of the posterior on one side of 0 here is between 75% and
80%, and thus does not meet our 89% cutoff criterium, which is why it is not saturated.
3.2. Tool-users versus non-tool-users (Model MT_1)
The influence of tides on space use patterns differed for tool-using and non-tool-using groups. While we
observe little difference between tool-users and non-tool-users in the number of capuchins present per
sequence (tool-users: 1.60 [95% CI 1.36 –1.95], non-tool-users: 1.65 [95% CI 1.42 –1.90]; see electronic
supplementary material, table S3 for estimates), the patterns of capuchin activity relative to the tidal
cycle vary.
For the tool-using group (figure 1 a), our model estimates a higher number of capuchins near the coast
compared to further inland, although the difference is small (change of less than 0.2, see electronic
supplementary material, figure S3 for a zoomed in plot of the area 0 –50 m from the coast). We see
more capuchin detections close to the coast (0 –30 m) at and after the peak of low tide (0 –6h )
compared with before ( −4–0 h). We do not see reliable evidence (greater than 89%) for a nonlinear
change in the number of capuchins, but the increase of capuchins close to the coast after low tide is
observed 75 –80% of the time, based on the derivative of the tensor smooth interactions (electronic
supplementary material, figure S4).
By contrast, for the non-tool-using groups (figure 1 b), our model estimates larger changes in capuchin
activity related to the tidal cycle, but consistent across all distances from the coast instead of concentrated
closer to the coast. Based on the heatmap, non-tool-using capuchins show more activity around the peak
of low tide, less activity after (around 2 h), and greater activity 4 h after low tide. There are no areas of the
400
change no. of capuchins
(–0.5, –0.4]
(–0.4, –0.3]
(–0.3, –0.2]
(–0.1, 0.0]
(0.0, 0.1]
(0.1, 0.2]
(0.2, 0.3]
(0.3, 0.4]
(0.4, 0.5]
(–0.2, –0.1]
tool-users non-tool-users
300
200distance to coast (m)
100
–4 4
hours until and after nearest low tide (=0)
0– 4 4 0
0
Figure 1. Tidal activity of tool-using versus non-tool-using capuchins . Two-dimensional heatmap showing capuchin activity (colour)
at various distances to the coast ( y-axis) and hours until and after nearest low tide ( x-axis), for the ( a) tool-using group and ( b)
non-tool-using groups separately. More colour-saturated areas indicate where greater than 89% of the posterior distribution of the
derivative of the tensor smooth interaction lies on one side of 0. Note the rug showing the density of sampling, which reflects the
greater density of sampling close to the coast and sparser sampling further inland.
royalsocietypublishing.org/journal/rsosR. Soc. Open Sci.10: 230355
8

PDF PAGE 9
heatmap where there is reliable evidence for a change in capuchin activity (electronic supplementary
material, figure S4).
3.3. Seasonality: tool-using group (Model MT_2)
We considered seasonality in separate models for the tool-using group and non-tool-using groups. Although
for the tool-using group we find comparable numbers of capuchins per sequence between the dry and wet
season (dry season: 1.54 [95% CI 1.30–1.79], wet season: 1.63 [95% CI 1.49–1.80]; see electronic supplementary
material, table S4), the patterns of capuchin activity in relation to the tidal cycle differ.
The activity of the tool-using group varies with the tides throughout the year, but stark differences exist
between the patterns observed in the dry and wet seasons. In the dry season (figure 2 a), capuchin activity
at all distances peaks around high tide ( −6 and 6 h) and is lowest around low tide ( −2 to 2 h). Changes in
when and where capuchins are active are smaller in the dry season than in the wet season. Based on the
derivative of this model, there are no combinations of distance and time to low tide where we have
reliable evidence for differences in activity (electronic supplementary material, figure S7). By contrast, in
the wet season (figure 2 b), we see the opposite pattern. Our model estimates that capuchin activity near
the coast is lowest after the peak of high tide, and is highest near the coast immediately preceding and
following low tide ( −2 to 4 h). Additionally , capuchins are most active further inland (250 –300 m from
the coast) around high tide ( −6 and 6 h). This is also the time period when capuchin activity near the
coast is lowest. The derivative highlights large areas where we have reliable evidence for a strong,
nonlinear change in capuchin activity , concentrated around the peak of low tide and cameras closer to
the coast (less than 30 m). See also electronic supplementary material, figure S6 for a zoomed in view of
predicted capuchin activity between 0 and 50 m from the coast.
3.4. Seasonality: non-tool-using groups (Model MT_3)
Tidal influence on the space use patterns of the non-tool-using groups is most pronounced during the dry
season, which is opposite to our findings for the tool-using group, whose activity near the coast is
estimated to peak around high tide in the dry season and around low tide in the wet season. As with
previous models, we found no change in the average capuchin activity between seasons (dry: 1.63
[95% CI 1.39 –1.92], wet: 1.58 [95% CI 1.39 –1.84]; see electronic supplementary material, table S5), but
rather changes in the timing of capuchin activity at different distances from the coast.
In the dry season (figure 3 a), the pattern estimated by our model is similar to the predictions of our
first model comparing tool-using and non-tool-using groups (figure 1 b). The model estimates higher
change no. of capuchins
(–0.5, –0.4]
(–0.4, –0.3]
(–0.3, –0.2]
(–0.1, 0.0]
(0.0, 0.1]
(0.1, 0.2]
(0.2, 0.3]
(0.3, 0.4]
(0.4, 0.5]
(–0.2, –0.1]
dry wet
300
200distance to coast (m)100
–4 4
hours until and after nearest low tide (=0)
0 –4 40
0
Figure 2. Tidal activity of tool-using capuchins: dry versus wet season . Two-dimensional heatmap showing capuchin activity (colour)
of the tool-using group at various distances to the coast ( y-axis) and hours until and after nearest low tide ( x-axis), for the ( a) dry
and (b) wet season separately. More colour-saturated areas indicate where 89% or more of the posterior distribution of the derivative
of the tensor smooth interaction lies on one side of 0.
royalsocietypublishing.org/journal/rsosR. Soc. Open Sci.10: 230355
9

PDF PAGE 10
capuchin activity near the coast in the hours around low tide ( −2 to 2 h, electronic supplementary
material, figure S9 for a zoomed in view of the predictions near the coast). The peak of capuchin
activity as estimated by the model lies further after low tide and slightly inland (3 –4 h after low tide
at 20 –40 m). We see no reliable evidence for a change in capuchin activity in any regions further of
the heatmap (greater than 89%), although at the areas with the largest predicted changes in capuchin
activity up to 70 –80% of the derivative is on one side of 0 (see electronic supplementary material,
figure S10). In the wet season (figure 3 b), changes in capuchin activity are much smaller than in the
dry season. The model estimates a slightly lower number of capuchins near the coast before and after
low tide ( −4 to 5 h) than around high tide ( −6t o −4 and 4 to 6); however, this difference is small (less
than 0.1). There are no regions of the heatmap where we have reliable evidence for a change in
activity for non-tool-using groups.
3.5. Daily activity: tool-using group (Model MD_1)
Consistent daily shifts in temperature or capuchin movement patterns are possible explanations for
varying capuchin detection rates at the coast relative to the tides. For the tool-using group, we see a
consistently different activity pattern between the dry and wet season in relation to distance to the
coast and time of day.
In the dry season (figure 4 a), our model estimates that capuchin activity near the coast is lowest in the
morning, and higher only after 17.00 (see electronic supplementary material, table S6 for model
estimates). Based on the derivative, we have reliable evidence for a change in capuchin activity in a
small region close to the coast around 11.00 (see electronic supplementary material, figures S11 and
S12). In the wet season (figure 4 b), we see higher coastal activity throughout the day , with the peak of
activity occurring between 11.00 and 19.00. Before 11.00, capuchin activity inland (greater than 200 m)
is higher than coastal capuchin activity. In the dry season, we observe capuchin activity until later in
the day (21.00) than in the wet season (19.00). In one small region of the heatmap (approx. 11.00 at
approx. 200 m inland), we have reliable evidence supporting a change in the number of capuchins.
However, the increase in capuchins ’ coastal activity in the afternoon is supported with over 80% of
the derivative being positive (see electronic supplementary material, figure S12).
3.6. Daily activity: non-tool-using groups (Model MD_2)
For the non-tool-using groups, we observed an opposite pattern to the tool-using group when
considering activity at varying distances to coast in relation to time of day (figure 5; see electronic
change no. of capuchins
(–0.5, –0.4]
(–0.4, –0.3]
(–0.3, –0.2]
(–0.1, 0.0]
(0.0, 0.1]
(0.1, 0.2]
(0.2, 0.3]
(0.3, 0.4]
(0.4, 0.5]
(–0.2, –0.1]
dry wet
400
300distance to coast (m)
100
200
–44
hours until and after nearest low tide (=0)
0 –44 0
0
Figure 3. Tidal activity of non-tool-using capuchins: dry versus wet season. Two-dimensional heatmap showing capuchin activity
(colour) of the non-tool-using groups at various distances to the coast ( y-axis) and hours until and after nearest low tide ( x-
axis), for the ( a) dry and ( b) wet season separately. More colour-saturated areas indicate where 89% or more of the posterior
distribution of the derivative of the tensor smooth interaction lies on one side of 0.
royalsocietypublishing.org/journal/rsosR. Soc. Open Sci.10: 230355
10

PDF PAGE 11
supplementary material, table S7). In the dry season (figure 5 a), our model estimates highest capuchin
activity at cameras near the coast (0 –70 m) in the morning until 12.00 (see electronic supplementary
material, figure S13 for a zoomed in view of predicted coastal activity). Estimated capuchin activity
is lowest in the afternoon (13.00 –18.00) from near the coast until as far as 300 m inland. We do not
have reliable evidence for a change for any areas of the heatmap, but there is up to 85% support for
the decrease in capuchin activity in the afternoon (electronic supplementary material, figure S14).
In the wet season (figure 5 b), estimated changes in capuchin numbers are smaller than in the dry
season, and there are again no areas of the two-dimensional heatmap where the derivative provides
reliable evidence for a change. The model estimates a slightly lower number of capuchins near the
coast than further inland throughout the day , until the late afternoon, when capuchins ’ coastal activity
increases slightly. Highest capuchin activity lies inland (300 –400 m) in the morning.
change no. of capuchins
(–0.5, –0.4]
(–0.4, –0.3]
(–0.3, –0.2]
(–0.1, 0.0]
(0.0, 0.1]
(0.1, 0.2]
(0.2, 0.3]
(0.3, 0.4]
(0.4, 0.5]
(–0.2, –0.1]
dry wet
300
200distance to coast (m)100
hour of day
0 5 10 15 20 0 5 10 15 20
0
Figure 4. Diurnal activity of tool-using capuchins: dry versus wet season. Two-dimensional heatmap showing capuchin activity
(colour) of the tool-using group at various distances to the coast ( y-axis) and hours of the day ( x-axis), for the ( a) dry and
(b) wet season separately. More colour-saturated areas indicate where 89% or more of the posterior distribution of the
derivative of the tensor smooth interaction lies on one side of 0.
change no. of capuchins
(–0.5, –0.4]
(–0.4, –0.3]
(–0.3, –0.2]
(–0.1, 0.0]
(0.0, 0.1]
(0.1, 0.2]
(0.2, 0.3]
(0.3, 0.4]
(0.4, 0.5]
(–0.2, –0.1]
dry wet
400
300distance to coast (m)
200
100
hour of day
8 12 16 8 12 16
0
Figure 5. Diurnal activity of non-tool-using capuchins: dry versus wet season. Two-dimensional heatmap showing capuchin activity
(colour) of the non-tool-using groups at various distances to the coast ( y-axis) and hours of the day ( x-axis), for the ( a) dry and
(b) wet season separately. More colour-saturated areas indicate where 89% or more of the posterior distribution of the derivative of
the tensor smooth interaction lies on one side of 0.
royalsocietypublishing.org/journal/rsosR. Soc. Open Sci.10: 230355
11

PDF PAGE 12
4. Discussion
White-faced capuchins living on Jicarón island adjust their activity patterns in correlation with tidal
cycles. Our findings are consistent with the hypothesis that availability of intertidal resources plays an
important role in shaping patterns of movement and habitat use. We find seasonal variation in the
relationship between capuchin activity and the tidal cycle, as well as in capuchins ’ daily activity
patterns. Tool-using and non-tool-using capuchins are seen less frequently near the coast in the dry
season during the hottest times of the day (approx. 13.00 –17.00), suggesting that high temperatures
likely limit capuchins ’ activity near the coast and potentially in the intertidal zone. Although
capuchins in both tool-using and non-tool-using groups consume intertidal resources, they show
different patterns of activity in relation to tidal cycles. Activity of the tool-using group near the coast
increases around high tide in the dry season, and around low tide in the wet season. Patterns are
more pronounced in the wet than the dry season, when differences in estimated capuchin activity
are larger and we have more reliable evidence supporting these changes. By contrast, non-tool-using
groups’ activity near the coast is higher around low tide in the dry season and around high tide in
the wet season, with more pronounced differences in capuchin activity in the dry season.
4.1. Capuchin activity varies in relation to tidal cycles
By showing that tool-using and non-tool-using capuchins ’ activity at the coast is related to the tidal cycle,
we provide additional evidence that exploitation of intertidal resources by maritime foragers shapes
the rest of their activity patterns, similar to seabirds [28] and arctic foxes [29]. While from our data,
we cannot conclude whether exploitation of the intertidal zone is opportunistic or obligate [5], the
tight coupling between Coiban capuchin ’s coastal activity and tidal cycles indicates that Coiban
capuchins likely exploit intertidal resources regularly. Tool-using and non-tool-using capuchins
consistently spend time near the coast at either low or high tide, depending on the season. While
there are multiple factors that could attract capuchins to the coast (e.g. coastal resources which are not
linked to the tides, like coconuts, crabs and sea almonds), because the timing of low tide shifts each
day , the observed patterns cannot arise from intermittent activity near the coast irrespective of the
tidal cycle. These findings indicate that Coiban capuchins are timing their activity at the coast to
coincide with specific parts of the tidal cycle.
4.2. Temperature limits coastal activity
Tool-using and non-tool-using capuchins show increased coastal activity at different periods of the tidal
cycle (figure 1). To understand these differences, we first have to consider differences in coastal activity
between seasons. If seasons are jointly analysed, signatures of seasonal variation in coastal activity can be
weakened or masked if a pattern is only present in one season and absent in the other, or if seasonal
patterns are opposite to one another. Higher temperatures and lack of rainfall in the dry season affect
capuchins’ daily activity and, potentially , their exploitation of the intertidal zone. During the hottest
times of the day , capuchins prefer resting rather than energy-expending activities like foraging and
travelling [72], and presumably , tool use. This is supported by both the tool-using group and non-
tool-using groups showing lower activity in the dry season during the hottest time of the day
(approx. 15.00) at all distances to the coast (figures 4 a and 5 a). Capuchins might compensate for
missed daylight activity by staying active later in the evening. We see this for the tool-using group
who shows activity up to 2 h later in the dry season than in the wet season (figure 4 b).
Temperature regulation might also be a driving force to spend time near the coast in general, or at
varying moments of the tidal cycle. Overall, the microclimate at the coast is cooler than inland, due to
the atmospheric phenomenon of sea breezes which carries cool air to the coast [73]. At high tide, this
cooler microclimate would be more pronounced than at low tide, when the water has further receded.
While hot temperatures might push capuchins to the coast where it is cooler, heat might also repel
them from the intertidal zone. When it is hot, capuchins might be less inclined to venture into the
intertidal zone, where there is no shade, the rocks and sands heat up in the sun, and water in tidal
pools and crevices evaporates more quickly. This rapid evaporation increases water temperature and
salinity , which reduces the number of species that survive in tidal pools. Thus, at high temperatures,
capuchins might be attracted to the cooler coast, but avoid the exposed intertidal zone where it is
hotter with less available prey.
royalsocietypublishing.org/journal/rsosR. Soc. Open Sci.10: 230355
12

PDF PAGE 13
4.3. Seasonality in capuchin activity: tool-users versus non-tool-users
The tool-using group shows decreased activity at all distances from the coast in the dry season around
low tide (figure 2 a), which supports the idea of temperature limiting their (coastal) activity. Immediately
after high tide, the sand is still wet and cool from the receding water and the capuchins can remain close
to the shade of the tree line, making it possible to consume snails, such as Nerita scabricosta, which
migrate to the top of the intertidal zone at high tide [74]. However, the lack of differences in activity
between coastal and inland cameras suggests this pattern might be more related to temperature
regulation aspects of the coast rather than potential intertidal foraging. In the wet season, when
temperature is not a limitation, we see reliably high coastal activity of the tool-using group up to 2 h
before and 4 h after the peak of low tide (figure 2 b). This group may exploit the full intertidal range
that is exposed in the hours before and after low tide. In contrast, the non-tool-using groups show
highest coastal activity in the dry season around low tide and 4 h after low tide (figure 3 a), which is
unexpected if temperature is a major limitation. However, increased capuchin activity is not localized
at the coast but rather extends far inland. One possible explanation is that non-tool-using capuchins
are at the coast during low tide only for some low tides of the day , while for others they are resting or
further inland. Some low tides will be cooler than others: the intertidal zone is likely colder during a
low tide at 9.00 than one at 14.00. Non-tool-using capuchins might be near the coast in the dry season
when it is not the hottest time of the day , and only venture into the intertidal during these cooler low
tides, which could lead to the observed pattern. The non-tool-using groups do not appear to
consistently be closer to the coast around low tide, but rather only after high tide (figure 3 a).
Additionally , differences in capuchin activity near the coast are less certain than for the tool-using
capuchins, indicating that non-tool-using capuchins show less consistent activity patterns with the
tidal cycles.
4.4. Seasonality in food availability as a driver of intertidal exploitation
Despite temperature limiting activity in the dry season, this appears to be when non-tool-using capuchins
show the strongest tidal pattern (figure 3 a). The contrasting pattern of tool-using capuchins showing
most coastal activity correlated with the tidal cycle in the wet season raises the question: what role
does seasonality in food availability play in intertidal exploitation? Resource scarcity is likely
experienced differently by tool-using and non-tool-using groups, as tool-using groups can access
structurally protected resources more efficiently [17]. Additionally , the tool-using group is located on
the side of Jicarón facing the open sea, where exposure effects are more severe and possibly fewer
resources are available than at the other side of the island. We have no direct information on seasonal
fluctuation in food availability on Jicarón, but tool use occurs more frequently in the transition
periods between wet and dry seasons, which might be in response to a limitation in terrestrial
resources [34]. This would be in contrast to tool use in Sapajus capuchins, which was found to be
driven by opportunity rather than necessity [22,75]. It is important to consider that capuchins are
dietary generalists who not only consume fruits but also insects and other invertebrates, which have
their own seasonal fluctuations. Additionally , oceans are also seasonal and, as such, resources in the
intertidal zone likely vary spatially and temporally across seasons (e.g. snails [76]). However, for tool-
using capuchins, exploitation of intertidal resources might not be driven by a scarcity of terrestrial
resources: in the wet season, there is likely peak availability of one of the tool-users most consumed
resources, Terminalia catappa, which bears fruit from January to April and from May to September
[77]. This coincides with high rates of coastal activity around low tide and the possible exploitation of
intertidal resources.
4.5. Tool-users versus non-tool-users: why such different patterns?
Why do we observe a difference in the relationship between activity and tidal cycles for the tool-using
group and non-tool-using groups? The non-tool-using groups show more activity at the coast during
low tide in the dry season, when temperature likely constraints coastal activity , and no clear tidal
pattern in the wet season (figure 3). The tool-using group ’s coastal activity is clearly consistent with
exploitation of tidal resources around low tide in the wet season (figure 2 b). We propose two
explanations for why non-tool-using groups might exploit intertidal resources more opportunistically
or more rarely than tool-using capuchins.
royalsocietypublishing.org/journal/rsosR. Soc. Open Sci.10: 230355
13

PDF PAGE 14
First, the spatial fixedness of both materials and resources for tool use might drive tool-users to spend
more time near the coast. Stones large enough to serve as anvils and hammerstones are more abundant
at the coast and the mouth of streams than further inland and may also be prevalent in the intertidal zone
itself. Further, important resources, including bivalves, crabs and sea almond trees are restricted to the
coast [77]. Because of these constraints, the tool-using group ’s important foraging spots and anvils are
all close to the coast, giving tool-users more opportunities to pick up visual and auditory cues of low
tide and more opportunities to exploit tidal resources. Non-tool-using groups, who also forage on sea
almonds but only eat the less calorically dense exocarp of ripe fruits and not the nut inside [34] (also
see [78] for evidence in another population), likely need to forage more widely for resources and do
not have a similar reliance on coastal locations as the tool-using group. Thus, increased proximity to
the coast due to reliance on coastal tool use resources might allow and encourage the tool-using
group to forage in the intertidal zone more frequently.
A second explanation is that tool use allows the tool-using group to exploit intertidal resources
more consistently than the opportunistic foraging by non-tool-using groups. By allowing access to
encapsulated resources, percussive tool use can both broaden the diversity of consumable food items
(such as tool-using Sapajus in mangroves gaining access to snails [30], improving diet quality [79], and
increase the efficiency of consuming known resources [17]). Both (or either) of these aspects of tool
use could explain why the tool-users might show more intertidal foraging than non-tool-using groups.
The costs due to energy investment, time lost foraging elsewhere, and risk of venturing out into the
exposed intertidal zone might be outweighed by tool-users ’ ability to open more resources in the
intertidal with greater efficiency than non-tool-users.
Differences in sampling between the tool-using group and non-tool-using groups in spatial and
temporal coverage (a small area with dense camera trapping versus a larger area with sparse camera
trapping) as well as comparing one group to a multitude of groups may have affected our results.
This possible limitation implies that while we can be more confident of the presence of a tidal pattern
in the tool-using group, we should interpret the tidal pattern in the non-tool-using groups ’ results
with more caution. We only have reliable evidence for a change in coastal capuchin activity in relation
to the tidal cycle for the tool-using group in the wet season, results of our other models showed more
uncertainty. Given this limitation, we can tentatively conclude that for coastal-living capuchins,
investing in consistent exploitation of intertidal resources might be a trade-off between nutrition
gained and energy and time expended in which using tools could be a decisive factor.
4.6. Opportunities for future research
To disentangle capuchins visiting the coast for temperature regulation versus foraging on intertidal
resources, we need data on capuchin activity from the intertidal zone itself. With camera traps, this
was not possible, thus we infer visits to the intertidal based on proximity to the coast. We know that
both tool-using and non-tool-using capuchins forage on intertidal resources from in-person
observations [34] (B.B., M.C. and Z.G. personal observations), and physical evidence of tool use in the
intertidal zone (figure 6). Additionally , capuchins on the island of Coiba also consume intertidal
resources like snails [33]. However, more than one process could contribute to the patterns of activity
we report, for example, capuchins being near the coast to regulate their temperature. We consider this
alternative by including spatial patterns depending on time of day , where time of day serves as a
proxy for temperature. Our findings that temperature likely constrains capuchin activity near the
coast, in particular in the dry season, suggest that in future research this should be examined in more
detail. One possibility is to directly measure the ambient temperature at varying distances from the
coast. One unexplored factor that might repel capuchins from the intertidal zone rather than attract
them is noise created by the breaking waves, which also fluctuates depending on the tidal cycle. Such
loud noises could disrupt vocal communication [80] between group members, and consequently be
another trade-off faced by capuchins foraging in the intertidal zone.
Additionally , with semi-arboreal species such as capuchins, terrestrial camera traps miss activity: we
cannot distinguish an absence of capuchins from capuchins present but in the trees. While the capuchins
on Jicarón are highly terrestrial [45], we attempted to further mitigate this concern by focusing solely on
fluctuations in the number of capuchins present in a sequence, rather than drawing conclusions based on
the absence. We did not place all of our camera traps randomly , but some were placed in targeted
locations, such as on anvils or streambeds, as this study is part of research on tool use. By only
comparing fluctuations in capuchin activity within a specific camera location we account for this (and
other) variation present between different camera locations.
royalsocietypublishing.org/journal/rsosR. Soc. Open Sci.10: 230355
14

PDF PAGE 15
Our findings of such clear tidal patterns in capuchin activity raise the question of how capuchins are
aware of the timing of the tides: do they rely on sensory cues (e.g. auditory , visual or olfactory), cues from
other species (i.e. seabird activity) or perhaps even cognitively ‘track’ the tidal cycle? Movement data
would provide insights on the exact timing of capuchins ’ visits to the coast, and what underlying
mechanism(s) allow(s) them to be there at the right time. Additionally , as the spatial scale of this
study (0 –400 m from the coast) is limited in comparison to typical capuchin home range sizes (e.g.
0.8–1.5 km2 on Barro Colorado Island [81]), tracking of individuals would also allow for integration of
our findings into a more comprehensive understanding of Coiban capuchin space use.
There are additional avenues to examine differences in consumption of intertidal resources by the
tool-using group and non-tool-using groups, such as DNA barcoding or stable isotope analysis to
indicate what proportion of the capuchins ’ diet is marine resources ( sensu [82]). Additionally , a more
detailed examination of the variation in daily activity between the tool-using group and non-tool-
using groups is needed to explore the effect tool use might have on their behaviour aside from
allowing access to tidal resources. Lastly , taking a similar approach in other tool-using and non-tool-
using maritime mammals would shed light on whether tool use is indeed important for consistent
exploitation of intertidal resources.
4.7. Broader implications of our findings
We found that capuchins living in coastal ecosystems show changes in their activity near the coast that
correspond to tidal cycles. While both tool-using and non-tool-using capuchins show tidal patterns
that correspond with potential exploitation of intertidal resources, only tool-using capuchins show a
strong, reliable pattern of increased coastal activity around low tide which is limited to the wet
season. Our findings suggest that tidal resources may be very important for coastal-living capuchins,
but that tool use might be key , or even a prerequisite, for their efficient exploitation. Although we lack
mainland data for comparison, it is important to consider that Coiban capuchins in this study live in
Figure 6. Evidence of tool use in the intertidal zone . Hammerstones and debris in the intertidal zone at low tide, which will be
washed away by high tide. Photos by Meredith Carlson & Zoë Goldsborough.
royalsocietypublishing.org/journal/rsosR. Soc. Open Sci.10: 230355
15

PDF PAGE 16
a coastal, insular habitat. Islands are often resource-limited: species richness decreases with island area
and distance to mainland or insular source populations. Additionally , habitual reliance on tool use is
observed in many endemic island-living species (i.e. Woodpecker finches [ Cactospiza pallida; 83],
New-Caledonian crows [ Corvus moneduloides ; 24], Hawaiian Crows [ C. hawaiiensis ; 84] and Keas
[Nestor notabilis ; 85]), or restricted to populations that live on islands (i.e. Burmese long-tailed
macaques on islands in the Andaman Sea [86]). Potentially , the presence of such a rich intertidal zone
in an otherwise challenging ecosystem might be one explanation for why tool use is more likely to
arise on islands: to aid exploitation of the intertidal zone.
Percussive tool use on coastal resources also played an important role in human evolution. Prehistoric
Homo sapiens sapiens used stone tools to access a variety of marine resources from the intertidal zone
[87–89]. Consumption of marine resources is argued to have aided the rapid increase in brain size
observed in human evolution, due to their high contents of docosahexaenoic acid as well as iodine
and selenium [90,91]. Modern coastal-living humans do still employ tools to forage in the intertidal
zone, and have been found to prefer foods that provide the best nutritious value for the least effort
[92]. Ethnoarchaeological work in humans has shown that intertidal foraging is a high-reward type of
foraging—if the tidal conditions are optimal [93]. Non-human primates like white-faced capuchins
provide an interesting parallel to understand the role tool use has played in human evolution, in the
absence of clear evidence from the fossil record.
The findings of this study have implications for the conservation of these capuchins, namely
highlighting the potential importance for exploitation of tidal resources for both tool-using and non-
tool-using capuchins. Exploitation of intertidal resources by tool-using capuchins appears to be less
frequent in the dry season, and due to anthropogenic climate change these periods of hot, dry
weather are globally becoming longer and more intense [94]. Further, the ocean is becoming
increasingly acidified, which negatively affects many marine organisms [95] and as such will
eventually affect the capuchins too as they forage on these marine resources. The role intertidal zones
play in capuchins ’ foraging patterns should be included when considering how to best conserve the
capuchins on Jicarón and their unique tool use behaviour [96].
Overall, our findings both uncover the impact exploitation of tidal resources may have on an animal ’s
general activity pattern, as well as increase our understanding of how tool use may provide access to a
new niche. Animals that are dietary generalists can opportunistically complement their diet with
valuable resources from the intertidal zone, and tool use might be necessary to make the investment
in these fluctuating resources worth the costs of keeping up with the tidal cycle.
Ethics.
Data for this study were collected as minimally invasively as possible. We obtained ethical permission for this
study from the relevant authorities, namely STRI and the Ministerio de Ambiente, Panama (scientific permit no. SC/
A-23-17, SE/A-98-19, and corresponding renewals and addenda).
Data accessibility. All data and code used for analyses in this paper are available via https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.
8129505 [71].
The data are provided in electronic supplementary material [97].
Declaration of AI use. We have not used AI-assisted technologies in creating this article.
Authors’ contributions. Z.G.: conceptualization, data curation, formal analysis, funding acquisition, investigation,
methodology , validation, visualization, writing —original draft, writing —review and editing; M.C.C.:
conceptualization, funding acquisition, methodology , project administration, resources, supervision, writing —review
and editing; S.E.A.: formal analysis, methodology , software, validation, visualization, writing —review and editing;
E.D.R.: investigation, writing —review and editing; S.F.G.: investigation, writing —review and editing; K.T.: formal
analysis, writing—review and editing; B.J.B.: conceptualization, data curation, formal analysis, funding acquisition,
investigation, methodology , project administration, resources, supervision, validation, writing—review and editing.
All authors gave final approval for publication and agreed to be held accountable for the work performed therein.
Conflict of interest declaration. The authors have no conflicts of interest to declare that are relevant to the content of this
article.
Funding. Open access funding provided by the Max Planck Society.
This research was supported by a Packard Foundation Fellowship (grant no. 2016-65130), a grant from the National
Science Foundation (grant no. NSF BCS 1514174), and by the Alexander von Humboldt Professorship endowed by the
Federal Ministry of Education and Research awarded to M.C.C. It was also funded by a Smithsonian Tropical
Research Institute Short-term Fellowship, a Coss Award for International Field Research through UC Davis and an
L.S.B. Leakey Foundation grant awarded to B.J.B. as well as funds from the Max Planck Institute. Lastly , Z.G. and
B.J.B. received funding in the form of a grant awarded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German
Research Foundation) under Germany’s Excellence Strategy—EXC 2117–422037984.
Acknowledgments. We want to thank the staff at STRI, particularly the field station on Rancheria, for their support and
assistance, and Lucia Torrez, Katrin Dieter and Angie Ruiz for supporting the logistics of this research. Additionally ,
royalsocietypublishing.org/journal/rsosR. Soc. Open Sci.10: 230355
16

PDF PAGE 17
Eliezer Vega, Chris Dillis, Pedro Luis Castillo, Lilisbeth Rodríguez, Julián León, Zarluis Miguel Mijango, Evelyn Del
Rosario and Tobias Begeer assisted with fieldwork. We are grateful to Lucy Aplin, Edwin van Leeuwen and Meredith
Carlson for their advice on this study , and to Alison Asbury for writing suggestions and feedback. We also wish to
thank Claudio Monteza-Moreno for his invaluable assistance with the data collection of this study , administration
of the project, and for providing feedback on the manuscript.
References
1. Hill SE, Winder IC. 2019 Predicting the impacts
of climate change on Papio baboon
biogeography: are widespread, generalist
primates ‘safe’? J. Biogeogr. 46, 1380 –1405.
(doi:10.1111/jbi.13582)
2. Henke-von der Malsburg J, Kappeler PM, Fichtel
C. 2020 Linking ecology and cognition: does
ecological specialisation predict cognitive test
performance? Behav. Ecol. Sociobiol. 74, 154.
(doi:10.1007/s00265-020-02923-z)
3. Henke-von der Malsburg J, Kappeler PM, Fichtel
C. 2021 Linking cognition to ecology in wild
sympatric mouse lemur species. Proc. R. Soc. B
288, 20211728. (doi:10.1098/rspb.2021.1728)
4. Clavel J, Julliard R, Devictor V. 2011 Worldwide
decline of specialist species: toward a global
functional homogenization? Front. Ecol. Environ.
9, 222 –228. (doi:10.1890/080216)
5. Carlton JT, Hodder J. 2003 Maritime mammals:
terrestrial mammals as consumers in marine
intertidal communities. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser.
256, 271 –286. (doi:10.3354/meps256271)
6. Collin R, Ochoa I. 2016 Influence of seasonal
environmental variation on the reproduction of
four tropical marine gastropods. Mar. Ecol. Prog.
Ser. 555, 125 –139. (doi:10.3354/meps11815)
7. Gyory J. 2010 Larval ecology and synchronous
reproduction of two crustacean species :
Semibalanus balanoidesin New England, USA and
Gecarcinus quadratus in Veraguas, Panama.
Thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology. See
https://dspace.mit.edu/handle/1721.1/62786.
8. Abele LG. 1974 Species diversity of decapod
crustaceans in marine habitats. Ecology 55,
156–161. (doi:10.2307/1934629)
9. Garrity SD. 1984 Some adaptations of
gastropods to physical stress on a tropical rocky
shore. Ecology 65, 559 –574. (doi:10.2307/
1941418)
10. Trowbridge CD. 1994 Life at the edge:
population dynamics and salinity tolerance of a
high intertidal, pool-dwelling ascoglossan
opisthobranch on New Zealand rocky shores.
J. Exp. Mar. Biol. Ecol. 182,6 5 –84. (doi:10.
1016/0022-0981(94)90211-9)
11. Gumert MD, Malaivijitnond S. 2012 Marine prey
processed with stone tools by Burmese long-
tailed macaques ( Macaca fascicularis aurea )i n
intertidal habitats. Am. J. Phys. Anthropol. 149,
447–457. (doi:10.1002/ajpa.22143)
12. Lewis MC, O ’Riain MJ. 2017 Foraging profile,
activity budget and spatial ecology of
exclusively natural-foraging chacma baboons
(Papio ursinus) on the Cape Peninsula, South
Africa. Int. J. Primatol. 38
, 751 –779. (doi:10.
1007/s10764-017-9978-5)
13. Simmons BL, Sterling J, Watson JC. 2014
Species and size-selective predation by raccoons
(Procyon lotor) preying on introduced intertidal
clams. Can. J. Zool. 92, 1059 –1065. (doi:10.
1139/cjz-2014-0108)
14. Stander PE. 2019 Lions ( Panthera leo)
specialising on a marine diet in the Skeleton
Coast Park, Namibia. Namib. J. Environ. 3, A-10.
15. Suraci JP, Clinchy M, Zanette LY. 2017 Do large
carnivores and mesocarnivores have redundant
impacts on intertidal prey? PLoS ONE 12,
e0170255. (doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0170255)
16. Navarrete S, Castilla J. 1993 Predation by
Norway rats in the intertidal zone of central
Chile. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 92, 187 –199.
(doi:10.3354/meps092187)
17. Biro D, Haslam M, Rutz C. 2013 Tool use as
adaptation. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 368,
20120408. (doi:10.1098/rstb.2012.0408)
18. Beck BB. 1980 Animal tool behaviour: the use
and manufacture of tools by animals . New York,
NY: Garland STM Pub.
19. Shumaker RW, Walkup KR, Beck BB, Burghardt
GM. 2011 Animal tool behavior: The Use and
manufacture of tools by animals. Revised and
updated edition . Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins
University Press.
20. Goodall J. 1964 Tool-using and aimed throwing
in a community of free-living chimpanzees.
Nature 201, 1264 –1266. (doi:10.1038/
2011264a0)
21. Ottoni EB, Mannu M. 2001 Semifree-ranging
tufted capuchins ( Cebus apella ) spontaneously
use tools to crack open nuts. Int. J. Primatol. 12,
347–358.
22. Spagnoletti N, Visalberghi E, Ottoni E, Izar P,
Fragaszy D. 2011 Stone tool use by adult wild
bearded capuchin monkeys ( Cebus libidinosus ).
Frequency, efficiency and tool selectivity.
J. Hum. Evol. 61,9 7–107. (doi:10.1016/j.jhevol.
2011.02.010)
23. Krutzen M, Mann J, Heithaus MR, Connor RC,
Bejder L, Sherwin WB. 2005 Cultural
transmission of tool use in bottlenose dolphins.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 102, 8939 –8943.
(doi:10.1073/pnas.0500232102)
24. Rutz C, St Clair JJH. 2012 The evolutionary
origins and ecological context of tool use
in New Caledonian crows. Behav. Processes
89
, 153 –165. (doi:10.1016/j.beproc.2011.11.
005)
25. Marshall AJ, Boyko CM, Feilen KL, Boyko RH,
Leighton M. 2009 Defining fallback foods and
assessing their importance in primate ecology
and evolution. Am. J. Phys. Anthropol. 140,
603–614. (doi:10.1002/ajpa.21082)
26. Marshall AJ, Wrangham RW. 2007
Evolutionary consequences of fallback foods.
Int. J. Primatol. 28, 1219 –1235. (doi:10.1007/
s10764-007-9218-5)
27. Tsuji Y, Kazahari N. 2019 Maritime macaques:
ecological background of seafood eating by wild
Japanese macaques ( Macaca fuscata). In
Primates in flooded habitats: ecology and
conservation (eds A Barnett, I Matsuda, K
Nowak), pp. 135 –143. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
28. Irons DB. 1998 Foraging area fidelity of
individual seabirds in relation to tidal cycles
and flock feeding. Ecology 79, 647 –655.
(doi:10.1890/0012-9658(1998)079[0647:
FAFOIS]2.0.CO;2)
29. Nielsen SM. 1991 Fishing Arctic foxes
Alopex lagopus on a rocky island in west
Greenland. Polar Res. 9, 211–213. (doi:10.3402/
polar.v9i2.6793)
30. Dos Santos RR, de Sousa AA, Fragaszy DM,
Ferreira RG. 2019 The role of tools in the
feeding ecology of bearded capuchins living in
mangroves. In Primates in flooded habitats (eds
K Nowak, AA Barnett, I Matsuda), pp. 59 –63.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
31. Krützen M, Kreicker S, MacLeod CD, Learmonth
J, Kopps AM, Walsham P, Allen SJ. 2014
Cultural transmission of tool use by Indo-
Pacific bottlenose dolphins ( Tursiops sp.)
provides access to a novel foraging niche.
Proc. R. Soc. B 281, 20140374. (doi:10.1098/
rspb.2014.0374)
32. Sanz CM, Morgan DB. 2013 Ecological and social
correlates of chimpanzee tool use. Phil.
Trans. R. Soc. B 368, 20120416. (doi:10.1098/
rstb.2012.0416)
33. Méndez-Carvajal PG, Valdés-Díaz S. 2017 Use of
anvils and other feeding behaviour observed in
cebus imitator, Coiba island, Panama.
Tecnociencia 19,5 –18.
34. Barrett BJ, Monteza-Moreno CM, Dogand žić T,
Ibáñez A, Crofoot MC. 2018 Habitual stone-tool-
aided extractive foraging in white-faced
capuchins, Cebus capucinus. R. Soc. Open Sci. 5,
181002. (doi:10.1098/rsos.181002)
35. Monteza-Moreno CM, Dogand
žić T, McLean KA,
Castillo-Caballero PL, Mijango-Ramos Z, Del
Rosario-Vargas E, Crofoot MC, Barrett BJ. 2020
White-faced capuchin, Cebus capucinus imitator,
hammerstone and anvil tool use in riparian
habitats on Coiba Island, Panama.
Int. J. Primatol. 41, 429 –433. (doi:10.1007/
s10764-020-00156-5)
36. Moynihan M. 1976 The New world primates:
adaptive radiation and the evolution of social
behavior, languages, and intelligence . Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press. See https://www.
jstor.org/stable/j.ctt13×16qs.
37. Oppenheimer JR. 1968 Behavior and ecology of
the white-faced monkey, Cebus capucinus, on
Barro Colorado Island, Canal Zone, University of
royalsocietypublishing.org/journal/rsosR. Soc. Open Sci.10: 230355
17

PDF PAGE 18
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. Urbana, IL,
United States.
38. Perry S, Ordonez Jiménez J. 2006 The effects of
food size, rarity, and processing complexity on
white-faced capuchins visual attention to
foraging conspecifics. In Feeding ecology in apes
and other primates (eds G Hohmann, M
Robbins, C Boesch), pp. 203 –234. Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge University Press.
39. Barrett BJ, McElreath RL, Perry SE. 2017 Pay-off-
biased social learning underlies the diffusion of
novel extractive foraging traditions in a wild
primate. Proc. R. Soc. B 284, 20170358. (doi:10.
1098/rspb.2017.0358)
40. Panger MA, Perry S, Rose L, Gros-Louis J, Vogel
E, Mackinnon KC, Baker M. 2002 Cross-site
differences in foraging behavior of white-faced
capuchins ( Cebus capucinus ). Am. J. Phys.
Anthropol. 119,5 2 –66. (doi:10.1002/
ajpa.10103)
41. Perry S. 2011 Social traditions and social
learning in capuchin monkeys ( Cebus). Philos.
Trans. R. Soc. B 366, 988 –996. (doi:10.1098/
rstb.2010.0317)
42. Fedigan LM, Jack KM. 2012 Tracking neotropical
monkeys in Santa Rosa: lessons from a
regenerating costa Rican dry forest. In Long-
term field studies of primates (eds PM Kappeler,
DP Watts), pp. 165 –184. Berlin, Germany:
Springer.
43. Perry S, Godoy I, Lammers W. 2012 The Lomas
Barbudal monkey project: two decades of
research on Cebus capucinus.I n Long-term field
studies of primates (eds PM Kappeler, DP
Watts), pp. 141–163. Berlin, Germany: Springer.
44. Araujo PE et al. 2021 First record of tool use by
a wild population of Cebus albifrons (Humboldt,
1812) (Primates, Cebidae) in Puerto Misahuallí,
Napo, Ecuador. Bol. Téc. 15,5 9 –72.
45. Monteza-Moreno CM, Crofoot MC, Grote MN,
Jansen PA. 2020 Increased terrestriality in a
Neotropical primate living on islands with
reduced predation risk. J. Hum. Evol. 143,
102768. (doi:10.1016/j.jhevol.2020.102768)
46. Milton K, Mittermeier RA. 1977 A brief survey of
the primates of Coiba Island, Panama. Primates
18, 931 –936. (doi:10.1007/BF02382942)
47. Ibáñez A. 2011 Guía botánica del parque
nacional coiba . Panama: International
Cooperative Biodiversity Groups: Instituo
Smithsonian de Investigaciones Tropicals:
Secretaría Nacional de C.
48. Pérez R, Condit R, Aguilar S, Hernández A,
Villareal A. 1996 Inventario de la vegetación de
la isla de Coiba, Panamá: Composición y
florística. Rev. Biol. Trop. 44,3 1 –40.
49. Conradt L. 2000 Use of a seaweed habitat by
red deer ( Cervus elaphus L.). J. Zool. 250,
541–549. (doi:10.1111/j.1469-7998.2000.
tb00795.x)
50. de Chevalier G, Bouret S, Bardo A, Simmen B,
Garcia C, Prat S. 2022 Cost-benefit trade-offs of
aquatic resource exploitation in the context of
hominin evolution. Front. Ecol. Evol. 10, 812804.
(doi:10.3389/fevo.2022.812804)
51. Marean CW. 2014 The origins and significance
of coastal resource use in Africa and Western
Eurasia. J. Hum. Evol. 77,1 7–40. (doi:10.1016/j.
jhevol.2014.02.025)
52. Ibáñez A, Pérez-Jordá J, Juste J, Guillén A. 1997
Los mamíferos terrestres del parque Nacional
Coiba (Panamá). In Flora y Fauna del Parque
Nacional de Coiba (Panamá) (eds Santiago
Castroviejo, Mauricio Velayos), pp. 469 –486.
Madrid, Spain: Real Jardin Botánico de Madrid
(CSIC)/Agencia Española de Cooperacíon
Internacional.
53. Titcomb M, O ’Dea A. 2020 Post-glacial Sea Level
rise on the Isthmus of Panama. See (doi:10.
25573/data.11919276_
54. Isaza I, Vrba E. 2010 Ocupación pre-colombina
de las Islas del Parque Nacional Coiba. Panama:
Informe final del Proyecto PRB08-003 archivos
SENACYT.
55. Cardiel JM, Castroviejo S, Velayos M. 1997 El
Parque Nacional de Coiba. El medio físico. In
Flora y fauna del parque nacional de coiba
( panamá) : inventario preliminar / editor
científico Santiago castroviejo ; editor adjunto
mauricio velayos, pp. 11 –24. Barcelona: Agencia
Española de Cooperación Internacional.
56. Caravaggi A et al . 2020 A review of factors to
consider when using camera traps to study
animal behavior to inform wildlife ecology and
conservation. Conserv. Sci. Pract. 2, e239.
(doi:10.1111/csp2.239)
57. Casaer J, Milotic T, Liefting Y, Desmet P,
Jansen P. 2019 Agouti: a platform for processing
and archiving of camera trap images. Biodivers.
Inf. Sci. Stand. 3, e46690. (doi:10.3897/biss.
3.46690)
58. Ridout MS, Linkie M. 2009 Estimating overlap of
daily activity patterns from camera trap data.
J. Agric. Biol. Environ. Stat. 14, 322 –337.
(doi:10.1198/jabes.2009.08038)
59. Rowcliffe JM, Kays R, Kranstauber B, Carbone C,
Jansen PA. 2014 Quantifying levels of
animal activity using camera trap data. Methods
Ecol. Evol. 5, 1170 –1179. (doi:10.1111/2041-
210X.12278)
60. Sollmann R. 2018 A gentle introduction to
camera-trap data analysis. Afr. J. Ecol. 56,
740–749. (doi:10.1111/aje.12557)
61. Planet Team. 2022 Planet Application Program
Interface: In Space for Life on Earth.
62. Hijmans RJ. 2022 terra: Spatial Data Analysis.
63. Bürkner P-C. 2017 brms: An R Package for
Bayesian Multilevel Models Using Stan. J. Stat.
Softw. 80,1 –28. (doi:10.18637/jss.v080.i01)
64. R Core Team. 2022 R: a language and
environment for statistical computing.
65. Pedersen EJ, Miller DL, Simpson GL, Ross N.
2019 Hierarchical generalized additive models in
ecology: an introduction with mgcv. PeerJ 7,
e6876. (doi:10.7717/peerj.6876)
66. Wood SA. 2006 Generalized additive models : an
introduction with R . Boca Raton, FL: Chapman
and Hall/CRC. (doi:10.1201/9781420010404)
67. Wickham H. 2016 Ggplot2: elegant graphics for
data analysis. New York, NY: Springer. See
https://ggplot2.tidyverse.org.
68. Curtis CJ, Simpson GL. 2014 Trends in bulk
deposition of acidity in the UK, 1988 –2007,
assessed using additive models. Ecol.
Indic. 37, 274–286. (doi:10.1016/j.ecolind.2012.
10.023)
69. Monteith DT, Evans CD, Henrys PA, Simpson GL,
Malcolm IA. 2014 Trends in the hydrochemistry
of acid-sensitive surface waters in the UK 1988 –
2008. Ecol. Indic. 37, 287 –303. (doi:10.1016/j.
ecolind.2012.08.013)
70. Alavi S. 2022 sealavi/GAM-first-derivative-
functions: v1.0. (doi:10.5281/zenodo.7457199)
71. Goldsborough Z, Crofoot MC, Alavi SE, Del
Rosario-Vargas E, Garza SF, Tiedeman K, Barrett
BJ. 2023 Code for: ZoeGold/tooltides: Data and
Code Tooltides Project Revision (v2.0). Zenodo.
(doi:10.5281/zenodo.8129505)
72. Campos FA, Fedigan LM. 2009 Behavioral
adaptations to heat stress and water scarcity in
white-faced capuchins ( Cebus capucinus )i n
Santa Rosa National Park, Costa Rica.
Am. J. Phys. Anthropol. 138, 101 –111. (doi:10.
1002/ajpa.20908)
73. Kuwagata T, Kondo J, Sumioka M. 1994 Thermal
effect of the sea breeze on the structure of the
boundary layer and the heat budget over land.
Bound.-Layer Meteorol. 67, 119 –144. (doi:10.
1007/BF00705510)
74. Levings SC, Garrity SD. 1983 Diel and tidal
movement of two co-occurring neritid snails;
differences in grazing patterns on a tropical
rocky shore. J. Exp. Mar. Biol. Ecol. 67, 261–278.
(doi:10.1016/0022-0981(83)90043-6)
75. Falótico T, Siqueira JO, Ottoni EB. 2017 Digging
up food: excavation stone tool use by wild
capuchin monkeys. Sci. Rep. 7, 6278. (doi:10.
1038/s41598-017-06541-0)
76. Collin R, Kerr K, Contolini G, Ochoa I. 2017
Reproductive cycles in tropical intertidal gastropods
are timed around tidal amplitude cycles.Ecol. Evol.
7, 5977–5991. (doi:10.1002/ece3.3166)
77. Perez R, Condit R. Tree atlas of Panama, Center
for Tropical Forest Science, Smithsonian Tropical
Research Institute. Accessed: March 2023.
78. Campbell J. 2013 White-faced Capuchins ( Cebus
capucinus) of Cahuita National Park, Grad.
theses Diss. Human Foods and Human
Interactions, Costa Rica.
79. Izar P, Peternelli-dos-Santos L, Rothman JM,
Raubenheimer D, Presotto A, Gort G,
Visalberghi EM, Fragaszy DM. 2022 Stone
tools improve diet quality in wild monkeys.
Curr. Biol. 32, 4088 –4092.e3. (doi:10.1016/j.
cub.2022.07.056)
80. Erbe C, Dent ML, Gannon WL, McCauley RD,
Römer H, Southall BL, Stansbury AL, Stoeger
AS, Thomas JA. 2022 The effects of noise on
animals. In Exploring animal behavior through
sound: volume 1: methods (eds C Erbe, JA
Thomas), pp. 459 –506. Cham, Switzerland:
Springer International Publishing.
81. Crofoot M. 2007 Mating and feeding
competition in white-faced capuchins ( Cebus
capucinus): the importance of short- and long-
term strategies. Behaviour 144, 1473 –1495.
(doi:10.1163/156853907782512119)
82. Lewis MC, Sealy JC. 2018 Coastal complexity:
ancient human diets inferred from Bayesian
stable isotope mixing models and a primate
analogue. PLoS ONE 13, e0209411. (doi:10.
1371/journal.pone.0209411)
83. Eibl-Eibesfeldt I. 1961 Über den
Werkzeuggebrauch des Spechtfinken
Camarhynchus pallidus. Z. Für Tierpsychol. 18,
343–346. (doi:10.1111/j.1439-0310.1961.
tb00424.x)
royalsocietypublishing.org/journal/rsosR. Soc. Open Sci.10: 230355
18

PDF PAGE 19
84. Rutz C et al. 2016 Discovery of species-wide tool
use in the Hawaiian crow. Nature 537,
403–407. (doi:10.1038/nature19103)
85. Goodman M, Hayward T, Hunt GR. 2018
Habitual tool use innovated by free-living New
Zealand kea. Sci. Rep. 8, 13935. (doi:10.1038/
s41598-018-32363-9)
86. Gumert MD, Kluck M, Malaivijitnond S.
2009 The physical characteristics and usage
patterns of stone axe and pounding
hammers used by long-tailed macaques in the
Andaman Sea region of Thailand. Am. J.
Primatol. 71, 594–608. (doi:10.1002/ajp.20694)
87. Erlandson JM. 2001 The archaeology of aquatic
adaptations: paradigms for a new millennium.
J. Archaeol. Res. 9, 287 –350. (doi:10.1023/
A:1013062712695)
88. Marean CW et al. 2007 Early human use of
marine resources and pigment in South Africa
during the Middle Pleistocene. Nature 449,
905–908. (doi:10.1038/nature06204)
89. Mazzia N, Flegenheimer N. 2015 Detailed fatty
acids analysis on lithic tools, Cerro El Sombrero
Cima, Argentina. Quat. Int. 363,9 4 –106.
(doi:10.1016/j.quaint.2014.04.027)
90. Crawford MA, Broadhurst CL. 2012 The role of
docosahexaenoic and the marine food web as
determinants of evolution and hominid brain
development: The challenge for human
sustainability. Nutr. Health 21,1 7 –39. (doi:10.
1177/0260106012437550)
91. Joordens JCA, Kuipers RS, Wanink JH,
Muskiet FAJ. 2014 A fish is not a fish: Patterns
in fatty acid composition of aquatic food may
have had implications for hominin evolution.
J. Hum. Evol. 77, 107 –116. (doi:10.1016/j.
jhevol.2014.04.004)
92. Mannino MA, Thomas KD. 2002 Depletion of a
resource? The impact of prehistoric human
foraging on intertidal mollusc communities and
its significance for human settlement, mobility
and dispersal. World Archaeol. 33, 452 –474.
(doi:10.1080/00438240120107477)
93. De Vynck JC, Anderson R, Atwater C,
Cowling RM, Fisher EC, Marean CW, Walker RS,
Hill K. 2016 Return rates from intertidal
foraging from Blombos Cave to Pinnacle Point:
understanding early human economies. J. Hum.
Evol. 92, 101 –115. (doi:10.1016/j.jhevol.2016.
01.008)
94. IPCC. 2022 Climate Change 2022: Impacts,
Adaptation and Vulnerability. Contribution of
Working Group II to the Sixth Assessment
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change. Cambrige, UK; New York, NY:
Cambridge University Press.
95. Gaylord B et al . 2015 Ocean acidification
through the lens of ecological theory. Ecology
96,3 –15. (doi:10.1890/14-0802.1)
96. Brakes P et al. 2021 A deepening understanding
of animal culture suggests lessons for
conservation. Proc. R. Soc. B 288, 20202718.
(doi:10.1098/rspb.2020.2718)
97. Goldsborough Z, Crofoot MC, Alavi SE, Del
Rosario-Vargas E, Garza SF, Tiedeman K,
Barrett BJ. 2023 Coupling of coastal
activity with tidal cycles is stronger in
tool-using capuchins ( Cebus capucinus
imitator). Figshare. (doi:10.6084/m9.figshare.c.
6837151)
98. Steward J. 2006 The concept and method of
cultural ecology. In The environment in
anthropology: A reader in ecology, culture, and
sustainable living (eds N Haenn, R Wilk),
pp. 5 –9. New York, NY: NYU Press.
royalsocietypublishing.org/journal/rsosR. Soc. Open Sci.10: 230355
19