PDF PAGE 1
Ecology and Evolution. 2024;14:e11384.	 		 	 | 1 of 10
https://doi.org/10.1002/ece3.11384
www.ecolevol.org
Received:	17	January	2024  |  Revised:	13	March	2024  |  Accepted:	24	April	2024
DOI: 10.1002/ece3.11384  
RESEARCH ARTICLE
callsync: An R package for alignment and analysis of multi- 
microphone animal recordings 
Simeon Q. Smeele1,2,3,4  |   Stephen A. Tyndel1,3  |   Barbara C. Klump1,5  |    
Gustavo Alarcón- Nieto1,3,6  |   Lucy M. Aplin1,7,8
1Cognitive & Cultural Ecology Research 
Group,	Max	Planck	Institute	of	Animal	
Behavior,	Radolfzell, 	Germany
2Department	of	Human	Behavior,	Ecology	
and	Culture,	Max	Planck	Institute	for	
Evolutionary	Anthropology,	Leipzig,	
Germany
3Department	of	Biology,	University	of	
Konstanz, 	Constance, 	Germany
4Department	of	Ecoscience,	Aarhus	
University,	Aarhus,	Denmark
5Department	of	Behavioral	and	Cognitive	
Biology,	University	of	Vienna,	Vienna,	
Austria
6Department	of	Migration,	Max	Planck	
Institute	of	Animal	Behavior,	Radolfzell,	
Germany
7Department	of	Evolutionary	Biology	
and	Environmental	Studies,	University	of	
Zurich, 	Zurich, 	Switzerland
8Division	of	Ecology	and	Evolution,	
Research	 School	of	Biology,	The	Australian	
National	University,	Canberra,	Australian	
Capital	Territory,	Australia
Correspondence
Simeon	Q.	Smeele,	Department	of	
Ecoscience,	Aarhus	University,	Aarhus,	
Denmark.
Email:	simeonqs@hotmail.com
Funding information
Swiss	State	Secretariat	for	Education,	
Research	and	Innovation,	Grant/Award	
Number:	MB22.00056;	Max- 	Planck-	
Gesellschaft; 	Deutscher 	Akademischer 	
Austauschdienst
Abstract
To	better	 understand	 how	vocalisations	 are	 used	 during	 interactions	 of	multiple	 in-
dividuals,	 studies	 are	increasingly	 deploying	 on-	board	devices	with	a	microphone	 on	
each	animal.	The	resulting	 recordings	 are	extremely	 challenging	 to	analyse,	since	mi-
crophone	clocks	drift	non-	linearly	and	record	the	vocalisations 	of	non-	focal	individu-
als	as	well	as	noise.	Here	we	address	this	issue	with	callsync,	an	R	package	designed	
to	align	recordings,	detect	and	assign	vocalisations	to	the	caller,	trace	the	fundamental	
frequency,	 filter	out	noise	and	perform	 basic	analysis	 on	the	resulting	 clips.	We	pre-
sent	 a	 case	 study	 where	 the	 pipeline	 is	 used	 on	 a	 dataset	 of	 six	 captive	 cockatiels	
(Nymphicus hollandicus )	 wearing	 backpack	 microphones.	 Recordings	 initially	 had	 a	
drift	of	~2 min,	but	were	aligned	to	within	~2 s	with	our	package.	Using	callsync, we 
detected	and	assigned	2101	calls	across	three	multi-	hour	recording	sessions.	Two	had	
loud	beep	markers	in	the	background	designed	to	help	the	manual	alignment	process.	
One	 contained	 no	obvious	 markers,	 in	order	 to	demonstrate	 that	 markers	 were	not	
necessary	 to	obtain	optimal	alignment.	 We	then	used	a	function	 that	traces	the	fun-
damental	 frequency	 and	applied	spectrographic	 cross	correlation	 to	show	a	possible	
analytical	 pipeline	where	vocal	similarity	is	visually	assessed.	The	callsync	package	
can	be	used	to	go	from	raw	recordings	 to	a	clean	dataset	of	features.	 The	package	is	
designed	 to	be	modular	 and	allows	users	 to	replace	 functions	 as	they	wish.	We	also	
discuss	the	challenges	 that	might	be	faced	in	each	step	and	how	the	available	 litera-
ture	can	provide	alternatives	for	each	step.
KEYWORDS
bio	acoustics,	communication	networks,	microphone	alignment,	recording	processing
TAXONOMY CLASSIFICATION
Behavioural ecology
This	is	an	open	access	article	under	the	terms	of	the	Creative	Commons	Attribution	License,	which	permits	use,	distribution	and	reproduction	in	any	medium,	
provided	the	original	work	is	properly	cited.
©	2024	The	Author(s).	Ecology and Evolution	published	by	John	Wiley	&	Sons	Ltd.
Simeon	Q.	Smeele	and	Stephen	A.	Tyndel	are	co- 	first	authors.		


PDF PAGE 2
2 of 10  |    
SMEELE et  al .
1  |  INTRODUCTION
The	study	of	vocal	signals	in	animals	is	a	critical	tool	for	understanding	
the	evolution	of	vocal	communication 	(Endler,	1993).	Vocalisations 	
commonly 	occur	in	group	contexts, 	where	they	may	function 	to	sig-
nal	 movement	 or	 identity,	 and	 mediate	 interactions. 	 However,	 the	
problem	of	assigning	identity	has	led	most	previous	work	to	focus	on	
long-	range	calls	or	on	vocalisations 	made	when	alone,	for	example, 	
territorial	 calls	and	song,	and	to	focus	on	recording	 one	individual	 at	
a	time.	 Yet	only	 by	studying	 the	 ways	that	 animals	 communicate	 in	
‘real	time’	can	allow	us	to	untangle	the	complicated	 dynamics	of	how	
group	 members	 signal	 one	 another	 (Gill	 et	 al.,	 2015).	 For	 example,	
the	context	 of	how	individuals	 address	 members	 of	their	social	net-
work	(Cheney	&	Seyfarth,	 2018),	and	the	ensuing	call	and	response-	
dynamics	(Araya-	Salas	et	al.,	2020),	can	only	be	studied	by	recording	
multiple 	individuals 	simultaneously. 	These	communication 	networks 	
can	 help	 us	understand	 how	animals	 coordinate	 call-	response	 with	
movement	(Demartsev 	et	al.,	2023)	as	well	as	the	function	 of	vocal	
imitation	 (Dahlin	 et	 al.,	 2014; Knörnschild et al., 2012 ;	 Nousek	
et al., 2006).
Recent	innovations	in	recording	technologies	have	allowed	for 	
a	 dramatic 	 increase 	 of	 fine- 	scale 	 on-	animal 	 bioacoustic 	 data 	 col-
lection (Gill et al., 2016;	 Sanchez	 et	 al.,	 2021;	 Wild	 et	 al.,	 2022), 
allowing 	 multiple 	 individuals 	 to	 be	 recorded 	 simultaneously. 	
However,	 as	 the	 capability	 of	 placing	 small	 recording	 devices	 on	
animals 	increases, 	so	does	the	need	for	tools 	to	process 	the	result-
ing	 data	 streams.	 Several	 publicly	 available	 R	packages	 exist	 that	
measure 	 acoustic 	 parameters 	 from 	 single 	 audio 	 tracks 	 (seewave : 
Sueur	 et	al.,	2008 ; tuneR :	Ligges	 et	al.,	2022; WarbleR :	A r a y a -	S a l a s	
&	 Smith- 	Vidaurre, 	 2017),	 but	 to	 our	 knowledge,	 none	 addresses 	
the	 critical	 issue	 of	microphone	 clock	 drift	 and	 the	 ability	 to	align 	
and	 process	 multiple	 recordings.	 This	 poses	 a	 serious	 issue	 for	
those 	studying 	communication 	networks 	of	multiple 	tagged 	indi-
viduals.	 In	this	 paper,	 we	apply	 a	new	 R	package,	callsync, that 
aligns 	 multiple 	 misaligned 	 audio 	 files, 	 detects 	 vocalisations, 	 as-
signs these to the vocalising individual and provides an analytical 
pipeline	for	the	resulting	synchronised	data.
The	 primary	 target	 for	use	 of	this	 package	 are	 researchers	 that	
study	 animal	 communication 	 systems	 within	 groups.	 As	 research -
ers	 deploy	 multiple 	 microphones 	 that	 record	 simultaneously, 	 the	
resulting	 clock	 drift	 can	 prove	 to	 be	 a	 barrier	 in	 further	 data	 pro-
cessing	steps	(Schmid	et	al.,	2010).	To	make	matters 	worse	this	drift	
is	 often	 non-	linear	 (Anisimov	 et	 al.,	 2014).	 Thus,	 if	 several	 micro-
phone	 recorders	 are	placed	 on	animals	 (whales:	 Hayes	et	al.,	2000; 
Miller	 &	Dawson,	 2009;	bats:	 Stidsholt	 et	al.,	2019),	it	is	critical	 for	
researchers	 to	 be	 able	 to	 line	 up	 all	 tracks	 so	 that	 calls	 can	 be	 as-
signed	correctly	 to	the	vocalising	individual	(loudest	track).	The	main	
functionality	 of	callsync	is	to	align	audio	tracks, 	detect 	calls	from	
each	track,	determine 	which	individual 	(even	ones	in	relatively 	close	
proximity	 to	 one	 another)	 is	 vocalising	 and	 segment	 them	 (detect	
start	and	end	of	the	signal	as	in	the	detection	module),	as	well	as	take	
measurements 	of	the	given	calls	(see	Figure 1).	As	callsync	takes	a	
modular	approach 	to	aligning, 	detecting 	and	analysing 	audio	tracks, 	
researchers	 can	choose	to	use	only	the	components	 of	the	package	
that suit their needs.
Current	 research	 packages	 that	 implement	 call	 alignment	 strat-
egies	 are	 either	 used	 in	 Matlab	 (Anisimov	 et	 al.,	 2014;	 Malinka	
et al., 2020) or C++ (Gill et al., 2015).	However,	these	tools	have	not,	
up	to	now,	been	adapted	for	the	R	environment,	 a	popular	program-
ming	 language	 among	 many	 animal	 behaviour	 and	 bioacoustic	 re-
searchers.	Many	of	these	tools	are	not	documented	publicly	nor	open	
source,	and	can	require	high	licencing	fees	(i.e.,	Matlab).	While	the	de-
sign	of	our	package	is	best	suited	to	contexts	where	all	microphones	
exist	in	the	same	spatial	area,	it	is	the	goal	that	it	can	be	adapted	to	
other	contexts.	callsync	is	publicly	available	on	CRAN	and	GitHub,	
is	beginner	friendly	with	strong	documentation 	and	does	not	require	
extensive	programming	background. 	This	open-	source	tool	will	allow	
researchers	 to	expand	 the	 study	 of	bioacoustics	 and	 solve	 an	issue	
that	impedes	detailed	analysis	of	group- 	level	calls.
2  | GENERATE EXAMPLE: SPRING PEEPER
We	 downloaded 	 two	 Spring	 Peeper	 (Pseudacris 	 crucifer)	 record-
ings	 from	 the	 Macaulay	 Library	 at	 the	 Cornell	 Lab	 of	 Ornithology	
(ML397067	and	ML273028).	Using	these	two	recordings,	 we	gener-
ated	two	artificial	 audio	tracks,	 one	drifted	 approximately	 18 s	from	
the	 other.	 Drift	 was	 simulated	 by	 inserting	 0.03 s	 of	 background	
noise	every	 second	 in	one	of	the	tracks.	 Background	 noise	for	each	
track	was	the	same,	and	constructed 	by	concatenating 	random	snip-
pets	 of	 noise	 from	 each	 of	 the	 Macaulay	 Library	 recordings.	 The	
background	noise	was	then	amplified	by	4 dB.
Both	 artificial	 tracks	 incorporated	 10	calls	 from	 each	 Macaulay	
recording. 	 The	 calls	 were	 arranged 	 to	 simulate	 alternating 	 calling	
behaviour	 between	 the	two	frogs.	 Using	the	tuneR	package	 (Ligges	
et al., 2022 ),	we	normalised	 the	 calls	 to	simulate	 the	 presence	 of	a	
focal	 individual,	 setting	 the	focal	 calls	 to	85%	and	background	 calls	
to	55%	of	their	maximum	amplitude.
We	then	used	callsync	to	align	the	tracks	 using	2 min	chunks,	
and showed that all detected calls were assigned to the correct in -
dividual.	 We	also	showed	that	the	fundamental	 frequency	 could	be	
correctly	 traced.	For	details	see	the	vignette	 in	the	CRAN	version	of	
callsync.
3  | CASE STUDY: COCKATIELS
We	present	 a	case	 study	 to	show	how	callsync	functions	 can	 be	
included	in	a	workflow	(see	Figure 1).	We	used	a	dataset	of	domestic	
cockatiels 	(Nymphicus hollandicus ).	These	birds	are	part	of	an	ongoing	
study	at	the	Max	Planck	Institute	 of	Animal	Behaviour	 in	Radolfzell,	
Germany.	 Thirty 	 birds	 were	 housed	 in	 five	 groups	 of	 six	 individu -
als,	with	each	group	of	six	housed	separately	 in	a	4 × 3 × 2.7 m	aviary	
facility.	 Each	 bird	 was	 fitted	 with	 a	TS-	systems	 EDIC-	Mini	 E77	 tag	
inside	 a	sewn	 nylon	 backpack	 fitted	 via	 Teflon	harness	 around	 the	
wings,	 with	 the	 total	 weight	 of	 all	 components	 under	 7%	 of	 body	
 20457758, 2024, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/ece3.11384, Wiley Online Library on [12/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


PDF PAGE 3
    |  3 of 10
SMEELE et  al .
weight	 (weight	 range	 of	 birds	 85–120 g).	 Audio	 recordings	 were	
scheduled	 to	record	for	4 h	per	day.	Each	microphone	 was	automati-
cally	programmed	 to	turn	on	and	off	daily	at	the	same	time.	For	the	
purposes	 of	 demonstration,	 three	 full	 recording	 sessions	 (ca.	 4 h)	
were	 selected 	 for	 processing 	 where	 the	 microphones 	 were	 sched-
uled	 to	record	 starting	 at	approximately	 sunrise	 (July	 15–16,	2021,	
and	 December	 8,	 2022).	 Two	of	 the	 recording	 sessions	 (2021)	 in-
cluded	manually 	played	beeps	in	the	background; 	one	every	hour	at	
10 kHz,	one	every	10 min	at	0.4 kHz.	This	was	done	to	ensure	that	the	
alignment	 would	 work	 both	 with	 and	 without	 external	 assistance,	
as	 some	 circumstances	 for	 research	 might	 allow	 such	 an	 inclusion,	
while	 others	 may	 prohibit	 it.	 Seven	 days	 after	 deployment, 	 micro-
phone	 recorders 	 were	 removed	 and	 recordings 	 were	 downloaded 	
as	.wav	files	directly	 onto	a	computer	from	the	tag,	according	 to	the	
manufacturer	 protocols.	 Data	 from	 each	 microphone	 were	 placed	
into	 the	 appropriate	 folder	 (see	 workflow	 instructions)	 and	 pro-
cessed	in	accordance	with	our	package	workflow.
3.1  |  Installation and set- up
The	 package	 call	 be	 installed	 from	 CRAN	 running	 install.
packages('callsync')	o r	a 	d e v e l o p m e n t a l	v e r s i o n	c a n	b e	i n-
stalled	from	GitHub	( h t t p s : / /	g i t h u b .	c o m /	s i m e o	n q s /	c a l l s y n c):
install.packages('devtools')
library(devtools)
devtools::install_github('simeonqs/callsync')
While	all	underlying	 code	and	functions	 from	the	CRAN	 reposi-
tory	can	be	found	in	the	aforementioned	 GitHub	repository,	we	have	
created	 a	 separate	 repository	 from	 which	 readers	 can	 follow	 the	
code	 from	 the	 case	 study:	 h t t p s : / /	g i t h u b .	c o m /	s i m e o	n q s /	c a l l s	y n c _	
a n _ R _	p a c k a	g e _	f o r _	a l i g n	m e n t _	a n d _	a n a l y	s i s _	o f _	m u l t i	-		m i c r o	p h o n e _	
animal_ 	recor	dings	.	 All	 required	 packages	 are	 also	 automatically	
installed	 and	loaded	 for	the	case	study	 when	running	 the	00_set_
up.R	script	from	this	repository.
3.2  |  Alignment of raw recordings
The	general	 goal	of	the	alignment	 step	 is	to	shift	 unaligned	 record-
ings	 to	 a	 degree	 that	 will	 allow	 vocalisations	 to	 be	 processed	 fur-
ther.	 While	 researchers' 	 requirements 	 on	 alignment 	 precision	 will	
vary,	the	output	of	this	function	 should	allow	researchers	 to	be	able	
to	 identify	 that	 vocalisations	 picked	 up	 across	 all	 microphones	 are	
identified	 as	the	same	call	on	every	 microphone.	 It	should	 be	noted	
that	recordings	are	still	not	perfectly	 aligned,	since	clock-	drift	occurs	
within	the	chunks.
The	raw	recordings	 consisted	 of	three	wav	files	of	ca.	4 h	for	six	
cockatiels	 (i.e.,	18	files	total).	The	backpack	 microphones	 have	inter-
nal	 clocks	 that	 sync	 with	 the	 computer	 clock	 when	 connected	 via	
USB	 and	 automatically	 turn	 recordings	 on	and	 off.	 However,	these	
clocks	 drift	 in	time	 both	 during	 the	 off	 period,	 creating	 start	 times	
that	differ	up	to	a	few	minutes,	and	also	during	the	recording	period,	
causing	 additional	 variable	 drift	 up	 to	 a	 minute	 in	 4 h	 of	 recording	
for	 the	 microphone	 model	 we	 used.	 The	 function	 align	 can	 be	
used	as	a	first	step	to	align	the	audio	recordings. 	To	accurately 	align	
these	tracks,	 the	full	audio	files	were	automatically	 split	into	15-	min	
chunks	 of	recording	 to	ensure	 that	 drift	 was	 reduced	 to	mere	 sec-
onds.	 This	value	can	be	adjusted	 depending	 on	the	amount	 of	drift.	
The	 function	 selects	 one	 recording	 (focal	 recording)	 and	 aligns	 all	
the other recordings relative to the selected recording using cross 
correlation 	on	the	energy 	content	(summed	absolute	amplitude) 	per	
time	 bin	 (option	 step_size),	 in	 our	 case	 0.5 s	 was	 used.	 This	 value	
can	 also	 be	 adjusted,	 lower	 values	 allow	 for	 greater	 precision	 but	
higher	 computational	 load.	 The	 call	 detection	 and	 assignment	 step	
(see	below)	includes	fine	alignment	and	we	therefore	accepted	a	po-
tential	 error	 of	0.5 s.	 There	 is	also	 an	option	 to	store	 a	log	 file	 that	
records	the	offset	for	each	chunk.
align(chunk_size = 15,                          # how long should the chunks be in minutes  
      step_size = 0.5,                          # bin size for summing in seconds  
      path_recordings = 'ANALYSIS/DATA',        # where raw data is stored  
      path_chunks = 'ANALYSIS/RESULTS/chunks',  # where to store the chunks  
      keys_rec = c('_\\(', '\\)_'),             # how to recognise the recording in the path  
      keys_id = c('ASWMUX', '.wav'),            # how to recognise the individual/microphone in the path  
      blank = 15,                               # how many minutes should be discarded before/after  
                                                # detection  
      wing = 10,                                # how much extra should be loaded for alignment in  
                                                # minutes  
      save_pdf = TRUE,                          # should a pdf be saved  
      save_log = TRUE)                          # should a csv file with alignment times be saved
For	cross	correlation,	 the	function	align	loads	the	chunks	 with	
additional	 minutes	 before	 and	 after	 (option	wing) to ensure that 
overlap	 can	 be	found.	 The	cross	 correlation	 is	performed	 using	 the	
function 	simple.cc,	which	takes	two	vectors 	(the	binned	absolute 	
amplitude	 of	the	two	recordings)	 and	calculates	 the	absolute	 differ-
ence while sliding the two vectors over each other. It returns the po -
sition	of	minimum	summed	difference,	or	in	other	words,	the	position	
of	maximal	overlap.	This	position	is	then	used	to	align	the	recordings	
 20457758, 2024, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/ece3.11384, Wiley Online Library on [12/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


PDF PAGE 4
4 of 10  |    
SMEELE et  al .
relative	 to	 the	 first	 recording	 and	 save	 chunks	 that	 are	 maximally	
aligned.	 Note	 that	 due	 to	 drift	 during	 the	 recording,	 the	 start	 and	
end	 times	 might	 still	 be	 seconds	 off;	 it	 is	 the	 overall	 alignment	 of	
the	 chunks	 that	 is	 optimised.	 The	 function	 also	 allows	 the	 user	 to	
create	a	pdf	document	 with	waveforms	of	each	individual	 recording	
and	a	single	page	per	chunk	(Figure 2),	to	visually	 verify	 if	alignment	
was	successful.	 For	our	dataset	 all	chunks	 but	one	aligned	 correctly	
without	a	filter.	If	this	is	not	the	case	the	option	ffilter_from can 
be	set	to	apply	 a	high-	pass	filter	 to	improve	 alignment.	 Mis-	aligned	
chunks	 can	 also	 be	rerun	 individually	 (option	chunk_seq) to avoid 
re-	running	 the	 entire	 dataset.	 This	 was	 done	 for	 the	 case	 study	 as	
well	(recording	session	from	16	July	2021,	start	time	15 min).
3.3  |  Call detection and assignment
The	next	step	is	to	detect	calls	in	each	set	of	chunks	and	assign	them	
to	the	correct	individual.	 The	detect.and.assign	function 	wrap-
per	loads	the	chunks	using	the	function	load.wave where it option-
ally	applies	a	high-	pass	filter	to	reduce	the	amount	of	low-	frequency	
noise.	To	detect	 calls,	detect.and.assign	first	 calls	the	function	
call.detect.multiple,	which	 is	used	to	detect	 multiple	 calls	 in	
an	R	wave	object.	 It	first	 applies	 the	env	function	 from	the	seewave 
(Sueur	 et	 al.,	 2008)	 package	 to	 create	 a	 smooth	 Hilbert	 amplitude	
envelope. It then detects all the points on the envelope which are 
above	a	certain	 threshold	 relative	 to	the	maximum	 of	the	envelope.	
After	removing	detections 	that	are	shorter 	than	a	set	minimum	dura-
tion (option min_dur)	 or	longer	 than	 a	set	 maximum	 (option	max_
dur)	it	returns	all	the	start	and	end	times	as	a	data	frame.
Because	 the	microphones	 on	focal	 individuals	 are	very	 likely	 to	
record	the	calls	of	the	non-	focal	individuals 	as	well,	we	implemented 	
a	step	 that	 assigns	 the	detected	 calls	 to	the	individual	 emitting	 the	
sound,	 based	 on	amplitude.	 For	this,	detect.and.assign	 subse-
quently	 calls	 the	 function	 call.assign, which runs through all 
the	 detections	 in	 a	 given	 chunk	 for	 a	 given	 individual	 (i.e.,	 output	
of	call.detect.multiple) and runs the call.detect	 function 	
to	 more	 precisely	 determine	 the	 start	 and	 end	 time	 of	 the	 call.	 It	
then	 ensures	 that	 minor	 temporal	 drift	 after	 the	align	 function 	
is	 corrected	 by	 rerunning	 the	simple.cc	f u n c t i o n	p a i r w i s e	b e-
tween	 the	 focal	 recording	 and	 all	 others.	 After	 alignment	 it	 calcu-
lates	the	summed	 absolute	 energy	 content	on	all	recordings	 for	the	
time	frame	when	the	call	was	detected	 and	compares	 the	recording 	
where	the	detection 	was	made	to	all	other	recordings. 	If	the	loudest 	
recording 	is	louder	by	a	set	percentage 	(this	value	can	be	adjustable 	
according to the researchers needs) than the second loudest record -
ing,	 the	detection	 is	saved	as	a	separate	 wav	file.	 If	not,	 this	means	
it's	not	possible 	to	determine 	the	focal 	individual 	and	the	detection 	
is	discarded	 (there	 is	an	option	 to	save	all	detections	 before	 the	as-
signment 	step).	The	function 	also	allows	the	user	to	create	a	pdf	file	
with all the detections (see Figure  3	for	a	short	example)	to	manually	
inspect the results.
detect.and.assign(path_chunks = 'ANALYSIS/RESULTS/chunks', # where to read the chunks  
                  path_calls = 'ANALYSIS/RESULTS/calls',   # where to store the calls  
                  ffilter_from = 1100,                     # from where to filter in Hz  
                  threshold = 0.18,                        # fraction of maximum of envelope for  
                                                           # detection  
                  msmooth = c(1000, 95),                   # smoothening argument for `env`  
                  min_dur = 0.1,                           # minimum duration in seconds for acceptance  
                  max_dur = 0.3,                           # maximum duration in seconds for acceptance  
                  step_size = 1/50,                        # bin size for summing in seconds  
                  wing = 10,                               # how many extra seconds to load for  
                                                           # alignment  
                  save_files = TRUE,                       # should the files be stored in path_calls  
                  save_extra = 0.05)                       # save 0.05 seconds before and after  
                                                           # detection
FIGURE 1 Flowchart	from	the	callsync 	package.	(1)	The	
alignment 	module	can	be	used	to	align	multiple	microphones	
that	have	non-	linear	temporal	drift.	(2)	The	detection 	module	can	
be	used	to	detect	vocalisations	in	each	recording.	Filters	can	be	
applied	to	remove	false	positives	in	the	detection	module.	(3)	The	
assignment 	module	can	be	used	to	assign	a	vocalisation	to	the	
focal	individual,	making	sure	that	vocalisations	from	conspecifics	
are	excluded	from	the	focal	recording.	(4)	The	tracing 	module	
can	be	used	to	trace	and	analyse	the	fundamental	frequency	for	
each	vocalisation.	(5)	The	final	analysis 	module	can	be	used	to	run	
spectrographic	cross- 	correlation	and	create	a	feature	vector	to	
compare	across	recordings.
 20457758, 2024, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/ece3.11384, Wiley Online Library on [12/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


PDF PAGE 5
    |  5 of 10
SMEELE et  al .
For	 the	 12-	h-	long	 cockatiel	 dataset,	 the	 function	 detected	 and	
assigned	4409	events,	2101	of	which	were	retained 	as	vocalisations 	
(see	next	 step).	The	removed	events	were	primarily	 noise	and	noisy	
calls	(e.g.,	overlapping	calls	and	calls	with	echo).	To	estimate	the	accu-
racy	of	the	function 	we	manually	detected	and	assigned	IDs	for	300	
calls	in	three	chunks	(chosen	due	to	high	vocal	activity),	ran	the	same	
filtering	 step	 as	callsync	functions 	described 	earlier 	to	get	rid 	of	
100	noisy	examples, 	and	compared	the	performance 	of	the	detect.
and.assign	function 	 to	 manually	 labelled	 data.	 The	 ground	 truth	
was	performed 	using	the	function 	calc.perf.	This	function 	simply	
determines 	whether	the	detected	calls	(and	subsequent	labelled	IDs)	
of	two	datasets	match.	If	sufficient 	temporal	overlap	exists	between	
the	 two	 datasets,	 they	 are	determined	 to	match.	 The	 false	 positive	
rate was < 4%,	 with	 noise	 (two	 detections)	 or	 noisy	 calls	 (four	 de-
tections)	being	responsible;	 and	the	true	positive	rate	was	81%.	The	
remaining	19%	(false	negatives)	were	mostly	calls	that	were	too	quiet	
to	be	picked	up	by	our	chosen	amplitude	threshold.
3.4  |  Tracing
To	analyse	the	calls,	the	chunks	were	loaded	and	the	function	call.
detect	was	run	to	determine	the	start	and	end	times	of	the	call.	The	
wave	objects	 were	then	resized	to	only	include	the	call	(new_wave). 
To	 trace	 the	 fundamental	 frequency	 we	 applied	 the	trace.fund 
function	 to	the	resized	wave	objects.	 This	function	 detects	 the	fun-
damental	 frequency	 in	a	sliding	window	based	on	the	spectrum	 and	
a	relative	threshold.	We	ran	the	latter	step	in	parallel	using	the	func-
tion mclapply	from	the	base	R	package	parallel (see Figure  4a	for	an	
example).
traces = mclapply(new_waves, function(new_wave)  # apply the function to each new_wave  
  trace.fund(wave = new_wave,                    # use the new_wave  
             spar = 0.3,                         # smoothing argument for the `smooth.spline` function  
             freq_lim = c(1.2, 3.5),             # only consider trace between 1.2 and 3.5 Hz   
             thr = 0.15,                         # threshold for detection, fraction of max of spectrum  
             hop = 5,                            # skip five samples per step  
             noise_factor = 1.5),                # only accept if trace is 1.5 times greater than noise  
  mc.cores = 4)                                  # run on four threads, has to be 1 on Windows
Since	 the	 call	 detection	 step	 also	 picks	 up	 on	 a	 lot	 of	 noise 	
(birds	 scratching,	 flying,	 walking	 around)	 as	 well	 as	 calls,	 we	 ran	
a	 final	 step	 to	 filter	 the	 measurements	 and	 traces	 before	 these 	
were saved.
measurements = measure.trace.multiple(traces = traces,             # object containing traces  
                                      new_waves = new_waves,       # object containing adjusted waves  
                                      waves = waves,               # object containing waves  
                                      detections = detections,     # object containing detections  
                                      path_pdf = path_pdf_traces)  # where to store pdf  
keep = measurements$prop_missing_trace < 0.1 &                     # max 10% missing points  
  measurements$signal_to_noise > 6 &                               # signal to noise at least 6  
  measurements$band_hz > 400 &                                     # bandwidth at least 400 Hz  
measurements = measurements[keep,]                                 # keep only these measurements  
traces = traces[keep]                                              # and these traces
3.5  |  Analysis
A	frequently	 used	method	to	compare	calls	is	to	measure	their	simi-
larity	 using	 spectrographic 	 cross	 correlation	 (SPCC)	 (Cortopassi	 &	
Bradbury,	2000),	where	 two	 spectrograms	 are	 slid	 over	each	 other	
and	the	pixelwise	difference	 is	computed	for	each	step.	At	the	point	
where	 the	 signals	 maximally	 overlap	 one	 will	 find	 the	 minimal	 dif-
ference.	 This	 score	 is	 then	 used	 as	 a	 measure	 of	 acoustic	 distance	
between	 two	calls.	The	function	run.spcc	runs	SPCC	and	includes 	
several	methods	 to	reduce	noise	in	the	spectrogram	 before	running	
cross-	correlation	 (for	 an	 example	 see	 Figure 4b).	 To	 visualise	 the	
resulting	 feature	 vector	 from	 running	 SPCC	 on	 the	 cockatiel	 calls	
we	 used	 uniform	 manifold	 approximation	 and	 projection	 (UMAP)	
(Konopka,	2022)	which	projects	the	results	in	two-	dimensional	space.	
Calls	 cluster	 very	 strongly	 by	 the	 two	 separate	 recording	 groups	
(2021	and	2022),	giving	some	evidence	of	different	vocal	signatures	
(see Figure 5).	This	is	a	very	simple	analysis,	and	we	only	included	it	to	
illustrate	a	potential	use	of	the	results	from	the	previous	steps.
4  | DISCUSSION
Here	 we	 detail	 our	 R	 package	 callsync,	 designed	 to	 take	 raw	
microphone 	 recordings 	 collected 	 simultaneously 	 from	 multiple 	
 20457758, 2024, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/ece3.11384, Wiley Online Library on [12/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


PDF PAGE 6
6 of 10  |    
SMEELE et  al .
individuals 	and	align,	extract 	and	analyse	their	calls.	We	present	call-
sync	performance	 on	a	computer-	generated	 dataset	of	10 min	of	re-
cording	from	two	frogs	and	a	case	study	of	12 h	of	natural	recordings	
from	 two	 times	 six	 communally	 housed	 captive	 cockatiels.	 Each	 of	
the	modular	components 	(alignment, 	detection, 	assignment, 	tracing	
and	analysis)	successfully	 achieved	the	stated	goals	in	both	systems.	
In	the	computer	generated	dataset,	no	errors	were	made.	In	the	case	
study,	misaligned	 audio	tracks	were	accurately	 aligned	in	a	first	step	
(see Figure 2),	calls	 were	 correctly	 identified	 in	the	 aligned	 record-
ings (see Figure  3),	the	individual	 making	 the	call	 was	selected	 (see	
Figure 3),	and	 downstream	 data	 analysis	 was	 performed	 (Figures 4 
and 5). callsync	can	perform	 alignment	 even	on	inter-	microphone	
drift	 that	 constitutes	 minutes	 as	 well	 as	 handle	 unpredictable	 and	
non-	linear	drift	patterns	on	different	microphones.
With	tracks 	aligned	to	a	few	seconds	and	only	six	false	positives 	
in	the	 case	 study,	 we	are	 confident	 that	callsync	is	a	robust	 and	
FIGURE 2 Example	of	the	alignment	output.	Olive- 	coloured	lines	represent	the	summed	absolute	amplitude	per	bin	( = 0.5 s).	Recordings	
are	aligned	relative	to	the	first	recording	(which	starts	at	0).	Note	that	recordings	2–5	initially	started	~ 2 min	earlier	(purple	arrow)	but	are	
now	aligned.	The	title	displays	the	start	time	of	the	chunk	in	the	raw	recording.
FIGURE 3 Example	of	the	detection	output.	Black	lines	are	the	waveforms.	Olive- 	coloured	dashed	lines	with	shaded	areas	in	between	
are	the	detected	calls.	Note	that	only	the	loudest	version	of	each	call	is	selected.	The	first	call	is	also	loud	in	the	first	channel	(top- 	row)	
but	contains	less	energy	throughout	the	whole	call	(channel	four	is	loud	for	a	longer	duration).	Animals	with	individual	specific	sounds	
(scratching,	etc.)	are	seen	clearly	on	only	single	microphones.
 20457758, 2024, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/ece3.11384, Wiley Online Library on [12/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


PDF PAGE 7
    |  7 of 10
SMEELE et  al .
useful	tool	for	bioacoustics	 research.	 Additionally,	one	false	positive	
was	 actually	 a	 true	 positive;	 in	 this	 case	 because	 of	 a	 tiny	 differ-
ence	in	start 	and	end	time	between 	the	ground	truth	and	automatic 	
detection,	 which	 led	 the	 ground	 truth	 to	 be	 filtered	 out,	 but	 the	
automatic	 detection	 to	 stay.	 Overall,	 the	 true	 positive	 rate	 of	 our	
results	 was	 81%,	 meaning	 that	 only	 19%	of	 the	 manually	 selected	
calls	 for	 ground	 truthing	 were	 not	 detected	 by	 the	call.detect 
function.	 Where	call	rate	across	call	types	 is	important,	 researchers	
can	set	the	threshold 	very	low	and	manually 	remove	false	positives. 	
Alternatively,	a	deep	neural	network	can	be	used	to	sort	signals	from	
noise (Bergler et al., 2022 ).
A	 further	 possible	 challenge	 with	 the	call.detect	 function 	
could	be	that	certain	 call	types	are	never	easily	distinguishable	 from	
background	 noise.	In	these	situations,	call.detect	is	likely	to	pick	
up	 a	 significant	 amount	 of	 background	 noise	 in	 addition	 to	 calls.	
Function	 parameters	 can	 be	 adapted	 and	 should	 function	 on	 most	
call-	types,	 as	 can	 post-	processing	 thresholding.	 For	 example,	 ma-
chine learning approaches (Bergler et  al., 2022; Cohen et al., 2022 ; 
Stowell	 et	 al.,	 2019)	 or	 image	 recognition	 tools	 (Smith-	Vidaurre	
et al., 2020 ;	 Valletta	 et	 al.,	 2017)	 can	 be	 later	 applied	 to	 separate	
additionally 	 detected 	 noise	 in	 particular 	 circumstances 	 where	 an	
amplitude	 based	 thresholding	 approach	 is	 insufficient.	 As	 well,	 in	
specific	 cases	 (e.g.,	 low	 amplitude	 calls),	 once	 the	 align	 function	 is	
performed, 	the	entire	call.detect	function	 can	 be	swapped	 out	
for	 deep	 learning	 call	 detection	 algorithms	 such	 as	 ANIMAL-	SPOT	
(Bergler et al., 2022 ) or other signal processing approaches (e.g., see -
wave	package	Sueur	et	al.	2008 ).
The	 microphones 	 used 	 in	 this 	 case 	 study 	 were 	 implemented 	
in	 a	 captive	 setting	 where	 all	 calls	 were	 within	 hearing	 range	 of	
each 	other 	and	each 	microphone. 	Thus, 	all	microphones 	contained 	
a	 partially	 shared	 noisescape.	 Despite	 their	 proximity	 to	 one	 an-
other,	 it	 should	 be	 noted	 that	 each	 microphone	 still	 contained 	
unique	 vocal	 attributes,	 such	 as	 wing	 beats	 and	 scratching,	 and	
yet	the	major 	alignment 	step 	still 	aligned 	all	chunks 	correctly. 	This	
was	 the	 case	 both	 in	 recordings	 with	 beep	 markers	 and	 without. 	
It	 is	 possible	 that	 researchers	 find	 that	 the	 noise	 differences	 be-
tween	 microphones	 are	 too	 high	 for	 the	 first	 alignment	 step	 to	
perform	 adequately.	 This	 would	 be	 particularly	 salient	 in	 field 	
settings 	where 	individuals 	within 	fission- 	fusion 	groups 	find 	them -
selves 	in	the	proximity 	of	other 	group 	members 	only 	some 	of	the	
time	 (Balsby	 &	 Bradbury,	 2009 ;	 Buhrman- 	Deever	 et	 al.,	 2008 ; 
Furmankiewicz	 et	 al.,	 2011),	 or	 in	 situations	 where	 animals	 con-
stantly 	move	(i.e., 	flying) 	or	do	independent 	behaviours 	that 	other 	
group	 members	 do	 not	 (e.g.,	 preening)	 (Demartsev	 et	 al.,	 2023). 
Researchers will have to assess their own dataset and test this 
package 	to	determine 	whether 	the	first 	step 	will 	perform 	well 	on	
their	 dataset.	 If	 it	 does	 not,	callsync	is 	a	modular 	package 	and 	
other	 approaches,	 such	 as	 deep	 learning	 (O'shea	 &	 West,	 2016) 
can	 be	 used	 instead	 of	 the	 first	 align	 function,	 while	 still	 using 	
other 	 components 	 of	 the	 pipeline. 	 Alternatively, 	 beep 	 markers 	
FIGURE 4 (a)	Spectrogram	of	a	cockatiel	call	with	start	and	end	(black	dashed	lines)	and	the	fundamental	frequency	trace	(green	solid	
line).	(b)	Noise	reduced	spectrogram	where	darker	colours	indicate	higher	intensity.
FIGURE 5 Call	distribution	in	uniform	manifold	approximation	
and	projection	space.	Dots	represent	calls	and	are	coloured	by	year.
Dimension 1
Dimension 2
−6 −3 036
−6 −3 03 6
 20457758, 2024, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/ece3.11384, Wiley Online Library on [12/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


PDF PAGE 8
8 of 10  |    
SMEELE et  al .
audible	 on	 all	 microphones	 could	 be	 implemented	 to	 assist	 with	
alignment.	 Of	 course,	 the	 tones	 would	 need	 to	 be	 audible	 on	 all	
microphones.
Assigning 	 a	 focal	 bird	 may	 be	 more	 difficult 	 if	 individuals 	 tend	
to	be	in	very	 close	 proximity	 to	other	 group	 members.	 If	the	group	
members	 spend	 time	 too	 close	 to	 one	 another	 (in	 our	 case	 less	
than	 5–10 cm,	the	 distance	 between	 the	 backpack	 and	 head	 of	the	
vocalising 	 individual) 	 (Boughman 	 &	 Wilkinson, 	 1998; Kloepper & 
Kinniry, 2018),	it	will	become	more	difficult 	to	distinguish 	the	vocal-
ising	individual	 from	other	surrounding	 individuals.	 In	the	context	of	
this	 case	 study,	 it	was	 sufficient	 to	only	 select	 a	vocalising	 individ-
ual	 when	 the	 second	 loudest	 call	 was	 at	 least	 5%	quieter	 than	 the	
focal	call.	This	threshold	can	be	adapted	if	needed,	or	the	assignment	
part	can	be	removed	entirely	 if	so	chosen.	 More	generally,	the	issue	
of	variation	 in	 spatial	 proximity	 could	 be	 solved	 by	including	 other	
on-	board	 or	 group-	level	 tools,	 such	 as	 accelerometers	 (Anisimov	
et al., 2014; Gill et al., 2015 ),	 or	 proximity	 tags	 (Wild	 et	 al.,	 2022). 
This	 adds	 extra	 weight	 and	 cost	 to	on-	board	 devices,	 and	 so	if	not	
possible,	 the	 other	 analytical	 tools	 could	 be	 considered	 to	 distin-
guish	 the	 focal	 calling	 birds.	 The	 specific	 tool	 will	 depend	 heavily	
on	 use-	cases,	 but	 include	 using	 discriminant 	 analysis	 (McIlraith 	 &	
Card, 1997)	or	cepstral	 coefficients	 (Lee	et	al.,	2006) to predict the 
ID	of	the	caller.
Lastly,	both	fundamental 	frequency 	tracing 	and	SPCC	work	well	
in	certain	 contexts.	 For	example,	 automatic	 fundamental	 frequency	
traces	work	best	for	tonal	calls	while	SPCC	works	best	when	the	sig-
nal	to	noise	 ratio	 is	sufficiently	 low	(Cortopassi	 &	Bradbury,	 2000). 
However,	 if	 these	 criteria	 are	 not	 met,	 several	 other	 tools	 can	 be	
used	 to	 manually	 trace	 fundamental	 frequency	 instead,	 such	 as	
Luscinia	 (Lachlan 	 et	 al.,	 2018)	 or	 manual	 tracing	 (Araya-	Salas	 &	
Smith-	Vidaurre, 	 2017).	 While	 it	 is	 important	 to	 consider	 all	 possi-
ble	 limitations	 of	callsync	it	 should	 also	 be	 noted	 that	 there	 are	
few	tools	that	exist	that	perform	this	much-	needed	task.	Indeed,	the	
fine-	scale	alignment 	step	of	callsync	allows	for	call	and	response	
dynamics	to	be	measured	regardless	of	how	close	the	calls	are	to	one	
another.	While	this	paper	 has	thus	far	only	addressed	 on-	board	 mi-
crophones, 	other	systems 	that	implement 	passive	acoustic 	monitor-
ing	systems	 (Thode	 et	al.,	2006)	and	microphone	 arrays	 (Blumstein	
et al., 2011)	should	 also	find	 benefit	 within	 this	package	 depending	
on	 the	 set-	up	 and	 degree	 of	 drift.	 Possible	 future	 research	 oppor-
tunities	 include	 trying	 to	 incorporate	 machine	 learning	 and	 noise	
reduction	 techniques	 so	that	the	major	alignment	 can	perform	 in	all	
contexts.
5  | CONCLUSION
This	open-	source	package	is	publicly	available	on	GitHub	and	CRAN. 	
We	welcome	all	continued	suggestions 	and	believe	that	our	package	
will	result	in	an	increase 	in	the	scope	of	bioacoustic 	research. 	Our	
package 	provides 	functions 	that	allow	alignment, 	detection, 	assign-
ment,	tracing 	and	analysis 	of	calls	in	a	multi-	recorder 	setting 	where	
all	 microphones 	 are	 within	 acoustic 	 distance. 	 The	 package 	 can	 be	
used	to	generate	 a	fully	 automated	 pipeline	 from	raw	recordings	 to	
the	 final	 feature	 vectors.	 We	show	 that	 such	 a	pipeline	 works	 well	
on	a	captive	dataset	with	4-	h-	long	recordings 	from	backpack 	micro-
phones 	on	six	cockatiels 	which	experience 	non-	linear	time	drif t	up	to	
several	minutes. 	Each	module	can	also	be	replaced 	with	alternatives 	
and	 can	 be	 further	 developed.	 This	 package	 is,	 to	 our	 knowledge, 	
the	 first	 R	package	 that	 performs	 this	 task.	 We	hope	 this	 package	
expands	 the	 amount	 of	 data	 researchers	 can	 process	 and	 contrib -
utes	to	understanding	the	dynamics	of	animal	communication.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Simeon Q. Smeele: 	Conceptualization 	(equal);	data	curation	(equal);	
formal	analysis	(lead);	investigation 	(equal);	methodology 	(lead);	pro-
ject	administration 	(lead);	software 	(lead);	validation	(equal);	visuali-
zation	 (lead);	 writing	 –	 original	 draft	 (supporting);	 writing	 –	 review	
and	 editing	 (equal).	 Stephen A. Tyndel: 	 Conceptualization 	 (equal);	
data	 curation	 (equal);	 formal	 analysis	 (supporting);	 investigation 	
(equal);	 methodology 	 (equal);	 project	 administration 	 (supporting); 	
software 	 (supporting); 	 validation	 (equal);	 visualization 	 (supporting); 	
writing	 –	 original	 draft	 (lead);	 writing	 –	 review	 and	 editing	 (equal).	
Barbara C. Klump: 	 Conceptualization 	 (supporting); 	 supervision 	
(equal);	writing	–	review	and	editing	(equal).	Gustavo Alarcón-  Nieto: 
Investigation	 (equal);	 writing	 –	 review	 and	 editing	 (equal).	 Lucy M. 
Aplin:	 Conceptualization 	 (supporting); 	 investigation 	 (supporting); 	
resources	 (lead);	 supervision	 (equal);	 writing	 –	 review	 and	 editing	
(equal).
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We	thank	Dr.	Ariana	Strandburg- 	Peshkin	for	early	feedback.	SQS	and	
SAT	received	 funding	 from	 the	 International	 Max	 Planck	 Research	
School	 for	 Organismal	 Biology	 and	 the	 International	 Max	 Planck	
Research	School	for	Quantitative	 Behaviour,	Ecology	and	Evolution.	
SAT	received	additional	 funding	from	a	DAAD	PhD	fellowship.	 LMA	
was	 funded	 by	 a	 Max	 Planck	 Group	 Leader	 Fellowship	 from	 the	
Max	 Planck	 Society,	 and	 is	 currently	 supported	 by	 the	 Swiss	 State	
Secretariat	 for	 Education,	 Research	 and	 Innovation	 (SERI)	 under	
contract	 number	 MB22.00056.	 Open	 Access	 funding	 enabled	 and	
organized	by	Projekt	DEAL.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT
The	authors	declare	no	conflicts	of	interest.
OPEN RESEARCH BADGES
This	 article	 has	 earned	 Open	 Data	 and	 Open	 Materials	 badges.	
Data	 and	 materials	 are	 available	 at	 h t t p s : / /	g i t h u b .	c o m /	s i m e o	n q s /	
c a l l s	y n c _	a n _ R _	p a c k a	g e _	f o r _	a l i g n	m e n t _	a n d _	a n a l y	s i s _	o f _	m u l t i	-		m i c r o	
phone_ 	animal_ 	recor	dings	 and (h t t p s : / /	d o i .	o r g /	1 0 .	1 7 6 1 7 /	3 .	3 X H T J A).
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
All	 code	 associated	 with	 this	 paper	 is	 publicly	 available	 on	 GitHub	
(h t t p s : / /	g i t h u b .	c o m /	s i m e o	n q s /	c a l l s	y n c _	a n _ R _	p a c k a	g e _	f o r _	a l i g n	
 20457758, 2024, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/ece3.11384, Wiley Online Library on [12/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


PDF PAGE 9
    |  9 of 10
SMEELE et  al .
m e n t _	a n d _	a n a l y	s i s _	o f _	m u l t i	-		m i c r o	p h o n e _	a n i m a l _	r e c o r	d i n g s	).	 All	
data	 and	 code	 are	 also	 publicly	 available	 on	 Edmond	 (ht tps:// doi. 
o r g /	1 0 .	1 7 6 1 7 /	3 .	3 X H T J A).	 The	callsync	 package	 can	 be	 installed	
from	 CRAN	 and	 a	developmental	 version	 can	 be	 found	 on	 GitHub	
(h t t p s : / /	g i t h u b .	c o m /	s i m e o	n q s /	c a l l s y n c).
ORCID
Simeon Q. Smeele  https:/ / orcid.org/0000-0003- 1001 -6615 
Stephen A. Tyndel  https:/ / orcid.org/0000-0001 -9989-0557 
Barbara C. Klump  https:/ / orcid.org/0000-0003-3919-452X 
Gustavo Alarcón- Nieto  https:/ / orcid.org/0000-0003-4076-3750 
Lucy M. Aplin  https:/ / orcid.org/0000-0001 -5367 -826X     
REFERENCES
Anisimov,	 V.	 N.,	 Herbst,	 J.	 A.,	 Abramchuk,	 A.	 N.,	 Latanov,	 A.	 V.,	
Hahnloser,	 R.	 H.	 R.,	 &	 Vyssotski,	 A.	 L.	 (2014).	 Reconstruction	 of	
vocal	 interactions	 in	 a	 group	 of	 small	 songbirds.	 Nature Methods , 
11(11),	1135–1137.
Araya-	Salas,	 M.,	 Andrés	 Hernández- 	Pinsón,	 H.,	 Rojas,	 N.,	 &	 Chaverri,	
G.	(2020).	 Ontogeny	 of	an	interactive	 call-	and-	response	 system	 in	
Spix's	disc-	winged	bats.	Animal Behaviour , 166,	233–245.
Araya-	Salas,	 M.,	 &	Smith-	Vidaurre,	 G.	 (2017).	 warbleR:	 An	r	package	 to	
streamline 	 analysis 	 of	 animal	 acoustic 	 signals. 	 Methods in Ecology 
and Evolution, 8(2),	184–191.
Balsby,	 T.	 J.	 S.,	 &	 Bradbury,	 J.	 W.	 (2009).	 Vocal	 matching	 by	 orange- 	
fronted 	conures 	(Aratinga canicularis ). Behavioural Processes , 82(2), 
133–139.
Bergler, 	C., 	Smeele, 	S.	Q.,	Tyndel, 	S.	A., 	Barnhill, 	A., 	Ortiz, 	S.	T.,	Kalan, 	
A.	 K.,	 Cheng,	 R.	 X.,	 Brinkløv,	 S.,	 Osiecka,	 A.	 N.,	 Tougaard,	 J.,	
Jakobsen,	 F.,	 Wahlberg,	 M.,	 Nöth,	 E.,	 Maier,	 A.,	 &	 Klump,	 B.	 C.	
(2022). 	 ANIMAL -	SPOT	 enables 	 animal- 	independent 	 signal 	 de-
tection	 and	 classification	 using	 deep	 learning.	 Scientific Reports , 
12(1),	1–16.
Blumstein,	 D.	T.,	Mennill,	 D.	J.,	 Clemins,	 P.,	Girod,	 L.,	 Yao,	K.,	 Patricelli,	
G.,	Deppe,	J.	L.,	Krakauer,	A.	H.,	Clark,	C.,	Cortopassi,	 K.	A.,	Hanser,	
S.	F.,	McCowan,	 B.,	Ali,	A.	M.,	&	Kirschel,	 A.	N.	G.	(2011).	Acoustic	
monitoring 	 in	 terrestrial 	 environments 	 using	 microphone 	 arrays:	
Applications, 	technological 	considerations 	and	prospectus. 	Journal 
of Applied Ecology , 48(3),	758–767.
Boughman,	 J.	 W.,	 &	 Wilkinson,	 G.	 S.	 (1998).	 Greater	 spear-	nosed	 bats	
discriminate 	group	mates	by	vocalizations. 	Animal Behaviour , 55(6), 
1717–1732.
Buhrman- 	Deever,	S.	C.,	Hobson,	E.	A.,	&	Hobson,	A.	D.	(2008).	Individual	
recognition	 and	 selective	 response	 to	 contact	 calls	 in	 foraging	
brown-	throated 	conures, 	Aratinga pertinax . Animal Behaviour , 76(5), 
1715–1725.
Cheney,	 D.	L.,	 &	Seyfarth,	 R.	 M.	 (2018).	 Flexible	 usage	 and	 social	 func-
tion	in	primate	vocalizations.	 Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America , 115(9),	1974–1979.
Cohen,	 Y.,	Nicholson,	 D.	A.,	 Sanchioni,	 A.,	 Mallaber,	 E.	K.,	Skidanova,	 V.,	
&	Gardner,	 T.	J.	 (2022).	 Automated	 annotation	 of	birdsong	 with	 a	
neural	network	that	segments	spectrograms.	eLife , 11, e63853.
Cortopassi, 	K.	A.,	&	Bradbury, 	J.	W.	(2000). 	The	comparison 	of	harmoni -
cally	rich	sounds	using	spectrographic 	cross-	correlation 	and	princi-
pal coordinates analysis. Bioacoustics , 11(2),	89–127.
Dahlin,	C.	R.,	Young,	A.	M.,	Cordier,	B.,	Mundry,	R.,	&	Wright,	T.	F.	(2014).	
A	test	of	multiple	 hypotheses	 for	the	function	 of	call	sharing	 in	fe-
male	 budgerigars, 	 Melopsittacus undulatus . Behavioral Ecology and 
Sociobiology , 68(1),	145–161.
Demartsev,	 V.,	 Gersick,	 A.	 S.,	 Jensen,	 F.	H.,	 Thomas,	 M.,	 Roch,	 M.	 A.,	
Manser,	 M.	 B.,	 &	 Strandburg- 	Peshkin,	 A.	 (2023).	 Signalling	 in	
groups:	 New	 tools	 for	 the	 integration	 of	 animal	 communication	
and	 collective 	 movement. 	Methods in Ecology and Evolution , 14(8), 
1852–1863.
Endler,	 J.	 A.	 (1993).	Some	 general	 comments	 on	 the	 evolution	 and	 de-
sign	of	animal	communication	 systems.	Philosophical Transactions of 
the Royal Society of London, Series B: Biological Sciences , 340(1292), 
215–225.
Furmankiewicz,	 J.,	Ruczyński,	 I.,	Urban,	R.,	&	Jones,	G.	(2011).	Social	calls	
provide	 tree-	dwelling	 bats	 with	 information	 about	 the	 location	 of	
conspecifics	at	roosts.	Ethology , 117(6),	480–489.
Gill,	 L.	 F.,	D'Amelio,	 P.	B.,	 Adreani,	 N.	 M.,	 Sagunsky,	 H.,	 Gahr,	 M.	 C.,	 &	
Ter	Maat,	A.	(2016).	A	minimum-	impact,	 flexible	 tool	to	study	vocal	
communication 	of	small	animals	with	precise	individual- 	level	reso-
lution. Methods in Ecology and Evolution , 7(11),	1349–1358.
Gill,	 L.	 F.,	 Goymann,	 W.,	 Ter	 Maat,	 A.,	 &	 Gahr,	 M.	 (2015).	 Patterns	 of	
call	 communication	 between	 group-	housed	 zebra	 finches	 change	
during	the	breeding	cycle.	eLife , 4, e07770.
Hayes,	 S.	 A.,	 Mellinger,	 D.	 K.,	 Croll,	 D.	 A.,	 Costa,	 D.	 P.,	&	 Borsani,	 J.	 F.	
(2000).	 An	 inexpensive	 passive	 acoustic	 system	 for	 recording	 and	
localizing 	wild	animal	sounds. 	The Journal of the Acoustical Society of 
America, 107(6),	3552–3555.
Kloepper,	 L.	 N.,	 &	 Kinniry,	 M.	 (2018).	 Recording	 animal	 vocalizations	
from	 a	 UAV:	 Bat	 echolocation	 during	 roost	 re-	entry.	 Scientific 
Reports , 8(1),	1–6.
Knörnschild,	 M.,	 Nagy,	 M.,	 Metz,	 M.,	 Mayer,	 F.,	 &	 von	 Helversen,	 O.	
(2012).	 Learned	 vocal	 group	 signatures	 in	 the	 polygynous	 bat	
Saccopteryx bilineata . Animal Behaviour , 84(4),	761–769.
Konopka,	T.	(2022).	Umap: Uniform manifold approximation and projection . 
h t t p s : / /	C R A N .	R -		p r o j e	c t .	o r g /	p a c k a	g e=	umap
Lachlan,	 R.	 F.,	 Ratmann,	 O.,	 &	 Nowicki,	 S.	 (2018).	 Cultural	 confor-
mity	 generates 	 extremely 	 stable 	 traditions 	 in	 bird	 song.	 Nature 
Communications , 9(1),	1–9.
Lee,	 C.-	H.,	 Lee,	 Y.-	K.,	 &	 Huang,	 R.-	Z.	 (2006).	 Automatic	 recognition	
of	 bird	 songs	 using	 cepstral	 coefficients.	 Journal of Information 
Technology and Applications , 1(1),	17–23.
Ligges, 	U.,	Krey,	S.,	Mersmann, 	O.,	Schnackenberg, 	S.,	Guénard, 	G.,	Ellis,	
D.	P.	W.,	Preusser,	A.,	Thieler,	A.,	Mielke,	J.,	Weihs,	C.,	Ripley,	B.	D.,	
&	Heymann,	M.	(2022).	Package ‘tuneR’.
Malinka,	 C.	 E.,	 Atkins,	 J.,	 Johnson,	 M.	 P.,	 Tønnesen,	 P.,	 Dunn,	 C.	 A.,	
Claridge,	 D.	E.,	Aguilar,	 N.,	Soto,	D.,	&	Madsen,	 P.	T.	(2020).	 An	au-
tonomous 	hydrophone 	array	to	study	the	acoustic 	ecology 	of	deep-	
water toothed whales. Deep Sea Research Part I: Oceanographic 
Research Papers , 158, 103233.
McIlraith,	 A.	 L.,	 &	 Card,	 H.	 C.	 (1997).	Birdsong	 recognition	 using	 back-
propagation 	and	multivariate 	statistics. 	IEEE Transactions on Signal 
Processing , 45(11),	2740–2748.
Miller,	 B.,	 &	 Dawson,	 S.	 (2009).	 A	 large-	aperture	 low-	cost	 hydrophone	
array	 for	 tracking	 whales	 from	 small	 boats.	 The Journal of the 
Acoustical Society of America , 126(5),	2248–2256.
Nousek, 	A.	E.,	Slater,	P.	J.	B.,	Wang,	C.,	&	Miller,	P.	J.	O.	(2006).	The	influ-
ence	of	social	 affiliation	 on	individual	 vocal	 signatures	 of	northern	
resident	killer	whales	(Orcinus orca ). Biology Letters , 2(4),	481–484.
O'shea, 	T.	J.,	&	West,	N.	(2016).	Radio	machine 	learning 	dataset 	genera -
tion with gnu radio. Proceedings of the GNU Radio Conference , 1, 1.
Sanchez,	 B.,	 Francisco,	 J.,	 Hossain,	 M.	 R.,	 English,	 N.	 B.,	 &	Moore,	 S.	 T.	
(2021).	 Bioacoustic	 classification	 of	 avian	 calls	 from	 raw	 sound	
waveforms	 with	 an	 open-	source	 deep	 learning	 architecture.	
Scientific Reports , 11(1),	1–12.
Schmid,	 T.,	 Shea,	 R.,	 Charbiwala,	 Z.,	 Friedman,	 J.,	 Srivastava,	 M.	 B.,	 &	
Cho,	Y.	H.	(2010).	On	the	interaction 	of	clocks,	power,	and	synchro -
nization 	in	duty-	cycled	embedded 	sensor	nodes. 	ACM Transactions 
on Sensor Networks (TOSN) , 7(3),	1–19.
Smith-	Vidaurre, 	G.,	Araya-	Salas,	M.,	&	Wright,	T.	F.	(2020).	Individual 	sig-
natures	outweigh 	social	group	identity 	in	contact 	calls	of	a	commu-
nally nesting parrot. Behavioral Ecology , 31(2),	448–458.
 20457758, 2024, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/ece3.11384, Wiley Online Library on [12/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


PDF PAGE 10
10 of 10  |    
SMEELE et  al .
Stidsholt,	 L.,	 Johnson,	 M.,	 Beedholm,	 K.,	 Jakobsen,	 L.,	 Kugler,	 K.,	
Brinkløv, 	S.,	Salles, 	A., 	Moss, 	C.	F.,	&	Madsen, 	P.	T.	(2019).	A	2.6- 	g	
sound	 and	 movement	 tag	 for	studying	 the	 acoustic	 scene	 and	 ki-
nematics	 of	 echolocating	 bats.	 Methods in Ecology and Evolution , 
10(1),	48–58.
Stowell,	 D.,	Wood,	 M.	D.,	Pamuła,	 H.,	 Stylianou,	 Y.,	&	Glotin,	 H.	(2019).	
Automatic	 acoustic	 detection	 of	 birds	 through	 deep	 learning:	
The	 first	 bird	 audio	 detection	 challenge.	 Methods in Ecology and 
Evolution, 10(3),	368–380.
Sueur,	J.,	Aubin,	T.,	&	Simonis,	C.	(2008).	Seewave,	a	free	modular	tool	for	
sound analysis and synthesis. Bioacoustics , 18(2),	213–226.
Thode,	 A.	M.,	Gerstoft,	 P.,	Burgess,	 W.	C.,	Sabra,	 K.	G.,	Melania	 Guerra,	
M.,	Stokes,	D.,	Noad,	M.,	&	Cato,	D.	H.	(2006).	A	portable	 matched-	
field	 processing 	 system	 using	 passive	 acoustic 	 time	 synchroniza -
tion. IEEE Journal of Oceanic Engineering , 31(3),	696–710.
Valletta,	 J.	 J.,	 Torney,	C.,	 Kings,	 M.,	 Thornton,	 A.,	 &	Madden,	 J.	 (2017).	
Applications	 of	 machine	 learning	 in	 animal	 behaviour	 studies.	
Animal Behaviour , 124,	203–220.
Wild,	 T.	 A.,	 Wikelski,	 M.,	 Tyndel,	 S.,	 Alarcón- 	Nieto,	 G.,	 Klump,	 B.	 C.,	
Aplin,	 L.	 M.,	 Meboldt,	 M.,	 &	 Williams,	 H.	 J.	 (2022).	 Internet	 on	
animals:	 Wi-	fi-	enabled	 devices	 provide	 a	 solution	 for	 big	 data 	
transmission 	in	biologging. 	Methods in Ecology and Evolution , 14, 
87–10 2 .
How to cite this article: Smeele,	S.	Q.,	Tyndel,	S.	A.,	Klump, 	
B.	C.,	Alarcón- 	Nieto,	G.,	&	Aplin,	L.	M.	(2024).	callsync:	An	R 	
package	for	alignment	and	analysis	of	multi- 	microphone 	
animal	recordings. 	Ecology and Evolution, 14, e11384. ht tps://
doi.org/10.1002/ece3.11384
 20457758, 2024, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/ece3.11384, Wiley Online Library on [12/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
