PDF PAGE 1
TheMentalitiesofGorillasandOrangutans
Comparative Perspectives
Research on the mental abilities of chimpanzees and bonobos has been widely
celebrated and used in reconstructions of human evolution. In contrast, scant
attention has been paid to the abilities of gorillas and orangutans.This volume
aims to complete the picture of hominoid cognition by bringing together the
work on gorillas and orangutans and setting it in comparative perspective.
The introductory chapters set the evolutionary context for comparing cogni-
tion in gorillas and orangutans to that of chimpanzees, bonobos, and humans.
The remaining chapters focus primarily on the kinds and levels of intelligence
displayed by orangutans and gorillas compared to other great apes, including
performances in the classic domains of tool use and tool-making, imitation,
self-awareness, social communication, and symbol use. Theﬁnal chapter
suggests that many of the abilities commonly attributed exclusively to chim-
panzees and bonobos were already present in the common ancestor of all the
great apes. All those wanting more information on the mental abilities of these
neglected, but important primates willﬁnd this book a treasure trove.
   is Professor of Anthropology at Sonoma State
University, California. She has published extensively and has co-edited three
other books,‘‘Language’’ and Intelligence in Monkeys and Apes(1990) with
K. Gibson,Self-Awarenessin Animalsand Humans(1994) with R. Mitchell
and L. Boccia andReachingIntoThought(1996) with A. Russon and K. Bard.
She has also co-authoredOrigins of Intelligence: The Evolution of Cognitive
DevelopmentinMonkeys,Apes,andHumans(1997) with M. McKinney.
  . is Associate Professor in the Department of Psy-
chology at Eastern Kentucky University. He co-editedDeception:Perspectives
onDeceitinHumansandNonhumans(1986) with Nicholas Thompson,Anthro-
pomorphism, Anecdotes and Animals(1993) with Nicholas Thompson and
H. Lyn Miles, andSelf-AwarenessinAnimalsandHumanswith Sue Taylor
Parker (1994).
 .  is Professor of Anthropology at the University of Tennessee
at Chattanooga, and Adjunct Professor of Psychology at the Georgia Institute
of Technology. She co-editedAnthropomorphism, Anecdotes and Animals
(1993) with Robert Mitchell, and is Director of Project Chantek, investigating
the cognitive and communicative development of an organgutan learning to
use sign language.
© Cambridge University Press www.cambridge.org
Cambridge University Press
0521580277 - The Mentalities of Gorillas and Orangutans: Comparative Perspectives
Edited by Sue Taylor Parker, Robert W. Mitchell and H. Lyn Miles
Frontmatter
More information

PDF PAGE 2
TheMentalitiesof
Gorillas and Orangutans
Comparative Perspectives
Edited by
SUE TAYLOR PARKER
ROBERT W. MITCHELL
H. LYN MILES
© Cambridge University Press www.cambridge.org
Cambridge University Press
0521580277 - The Mentalities of Gorillas and Orangutans: Comparative Perspectives
Edited by Sue Taylor Parker, Robert W. Mitchell and H. Lyn Miles
Frontmatter
More information

PDF PAGE 3
         
The Pitt Building, Trumpington Street, Cambridge, United Kingdom
  
The Edinburgh Building, Cambridge CB2 2RU, UK www.cup.cam.ac.uk
40 West 20th Street, New York, NY 10011–4211, USA www.cup.org
10 Stamford Road, Oakleigh, Melbourne 3166, Australia
Ruiz de Alarco ´n 13, 28014 Madrid, Spain
© Cambridge University Press 1999
This book is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception
and to the provisions of relevant collective licensing agreements,
no reproduction of any part may take place without
the written permission of Cambridge University Press.
First published 1999
Printed in the United Kingdom at the University Press, Cambridge
Typeset in Ehrhardt 9.5/12pt []
AcataloguerecordforthisbookisavailablefromtheBritishLibrary
ISBN 0 521 58027 7 hardback
© Cambridge University Press www.cambridge.org
Cambridge University Press
0521580277 - The Mentalities of Gorillas and Orangutans: Comparative Perspectives
Edited by Sue Taylor Parker, Robert W. Mitchell and H. Lyn Miles
Frontmatter
More information

PDF PAGE 4
Contents
Listofcontributors[vii]
Preface[ix]
Acknowledgments[xi]
I Comparativeevolutionaryanddevelopmentalperspectiveson
gorillasandorangutans
1 Hominid family values: morphological and molecular data on
relations among the great apes and humans [3]
  .
2 The life history and development of great apes in comparative
perspective [43]
  .
3 The frontal lobes of the great apes with a focus on the gorilla
and the orangutan [70]
 
II Cognitionandtooluseingorillasandorangutans
4 Intelligent tool use in wild Sumatran orangutans [99]
  . ,  . ,   . 
5 Orangutans’ imitation of tool use: a cognitive interpretation [117]
  .
6 Object manipulation and skill organization in the complex food
preparation of mountain gorillas [147]
  .
7 Development of sensorimotor intelligence in infant gorillas: the
manipulation of objects in problem-solving and exploration [160]
  .´
8 Tool use in captive gorillas [179]
  . ,  . ,  ,
   .
© Cambridge University Press www.cambridge.org
Cambridge University Press
0521580277 - The Mentalities of Gorillas and Orangutans: Comparative Perspectives
Edited by Sue Taylor Parker, Robert W. Mitchell and H. Lyn Miles
Frontmatter
More information

PDF PAGE 5
9 A survey of tool use in zoo gorillas [188]
  . ,  ,  ,  
III Communicationingorillasandorangutans
10 Symbolic communication with and by great apes [197]
. 
11 The development of spontaneous gestural communication in a
group of zoo-living lowland gorillas [211]
  .    .
12 Early sign-language acquisition: comparisons between children
and gorillas [240]
  .    ..
13 Early sign performance in a free-ranging, adult orangutan [265]
  .   ´ ..
IV Socialcognitioningorillasandorangutans
14 Comparative aspects of mirror self-recognition in great apes [283]
  . ,  , ˆ    
15 Deception and concealment as strategic script violation in
great apes and humans [295]
  .
16 Levels of imitation and cognitive mechanisms in orangutans [316]
 
17 Parental encouragement inGorillain comparative perspective: implications
for social cognition and the evolution of teaching [342]
 
18 The development of social roles in the play of an infant gorilla and its
relationship to sensorimotor intellectual development [367]
  .
V Epilogue
19 Thementalitiesof gorillasand orangutansin phylogenetic perspective [397]
  .    .
Indexofauthors[412]
Indexofsubjects[416]
vi Contents
© Cambridge University Press www.cambridge.org
Cambridge University Press
0521580277 - The Mentalities of Gorillas and Orangutans: Comparative Perspectives
Edited by Sue Taylor Parker, Robert W. Mitchell and H. Lyn Miles
Frontmatter
More information

PDF PAGE 6
Contributors
DAVID R. BEGUN
Department of Anthropology, University
of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, M5S 1A1,
Canada
JOHN D. BONVILLIAN
department of Psychology, University of
Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22903, USA
SARAH T. BOYSEN
The Ape Cognition Project, The Ohio
State University, OH 43210–1222, USA
RICHARD W. BYRNE
Scottish Primate Research Group, St.
Andrews University, St. Andrews, Fife,
KY16 9JU, Scotland
JOSEPH CALL
Department of Psychology, University of
Liverpool, Liverpool, L69 3BX, England
SIA
ˆNE V A N S
Dumond Conservancy for Tropical Forests
and Primates, 14805 SW 2nd Street,
Miami, FL 33170, USA
ELIZABETH A. FOX
Department of Biological Anthropology
and Anatomy, Duke University, Durham,
NC, USA
BIRUTE
´M. F. GALDIKAS
Department of Archeology, Simon Fraser
University, Vancouver, British Columbia,
V5A 1S6, Canada
JUAN CARLOS GO
´MEZ
Scottish Primate Research Group
St. Andrews University, St. Andrews, Fife,
KY16 9JU, Scotland
JAY GOULD
Department of University of West Florida,
Pensacola, FL 32514, USA
PETER HALLIDAY
University of Kent, Canterbury, UK
YOLANDA MULDONADO
HALLIDAY
Howlett’s Park Zoo, Canterbury, England
MARY KERR
Gorilla World, San Francisco Zoo, San
Francisco, CA 94116, USA
VALERIE A. KUHLMEIER
The Ape Cognition Project, The Ohio
State University, OH 43210–1222, USA
HAL MARKOWITZ
Department of Psychology, San Francisco
State University, San Francisco, CA
94132, USA
H. LYN MILES
Department of Sociology and
Anthropology, University of Tennessee at
Chattanooga, Chattanooga, TN 37403,
USA
ROBERT MITCHELL
Department of Psychology, Eastern
Kentucky University, Richmond, KY
40475–3108, USA
SUE TAYLOR PARKER
Department of Anthropology, Sonoma
State University Rohnert Park, CA 94928,
USA
© Cambridge University Press www.cambridge.org
Cambridge University Press
0521580277 - The Mentalities of Gorillas and Orangutans: Comparative Perspectives
Edited by Sue Taylor Parker, Robert W. Mitchell and H. Lyn Miles
Frontmatter
More information

PDF PAGE 7
FRANCINE G. P. PATTERSON
The Gorilla Foundation, Woodside, CA
94062, USA
ANNE E. RUSSON
Department of Psychology, Glendon
College, York University, Toronto,
Ontario, M4N 3M6, Canada
DENA SARAUW
Department of Psychology, Lehman
College, CUNY, Bronx, NY 10468, USA
CAREL P. VAN SCHAIK
Department of Biological Anthropology,
Box 90383, Duke University, Durham NC
27708–0383, USA
KATERINA SEMENDEFERI
Department of Anthropology, University
of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA
92093–0532, USA
GARY L. SHAPIRO
Orangutan Foundation International, Los
Angeles, CA 90049, USA
ARNOLD F. SITOMPUL
Department of Biology, University of
Indonesia, Depok 16424, Jawa Barat,
Indonesia
KARYL B. SWARTZ
Department of Psychology, Lehman
College, CUNY, Bronx, NY 10468, USA
JOANNE E. TANNER
School of Psychology, St. Andrews
University, St. Andrews, Fife, KY16 9JU,
Scotland
ANDREW WHITEN
Scottish Primate Research Group, St.
Andrews University, St. Andrews, Fife,
KY16 9JU, Scotland
viii Contributors
© Cambridge University Press www.cambridge.org
Cambridge University Press
0521580277 - The Mentalities of Gorillas and Orangutans: Comparative Perspectives
Edited by Sue Taylor Parker, Robert W. Mitchell and H. Lyn Miles
Frontmatter
More information

PDF PAGE 8
Preface
The titleThementalitiesofgorillasandorangutans:Comparativeperspectiveswas inspired
by Ko ¨hler’s famous bookThementalityofapes(1927), in which apes were implicitly
equated with chimpanzees. This book focuses on two other great apes that were less
known in Ko ¨hler’s day. It is the fourth in a related series of edited volumes on cognition
of great apes. Theﬁrst volume,‘‘Language’’andintelligenceinmonkeysandapes(Parker
& Gibson, 1990), emphasized the importance of using models from developmental
psychology to compare the cognitive and symbolic abilities of monkeys, apes, and
humans. The second volume,Self-awarenessinanimalsandhumans(Parker, Mitchell, &
Boccia, 1994), used developmental frameworks to compare manifestations of self-
awareness in monkeys, apes, and humans. It was aimed at broadening the scope of
research in this subject to extend beyond the classical mark test for mirror self-
recognition. The third volume,Reachingintothought(Russon, Bard, and Parker, 1996),
focused on cognitive abilities of great apes using models from developmental psychol-
ogy, but extended the scope to include studies in wild populations.
This most recent volume continues the tradition of using models from developmen-
tal psychology to compare the cognitive abilities of great apes, and that of including
studies from both captive and wild populations. It also expands the preview to include
studies of taxonomy and phylogeny (Begun, this volume) and the brain (Semendeferi,
this volume). It diﬀers from the other volumes in focusing primarily on gorillas and
orangutans. The aim of this volume is to redress the chimpocentric imbalance in
attention to chimpanzees and bonobos at the expense of the other great apes. This bias
follows in part from the greater availability of chimpanzees in captivity and the greater
number ofﬁeld studies of chimpanzees in the wild. It also arises from the greater appeal
of studying our closest relatives, and,ﬁnally, from our fascination with another species
that hunts, uses tools, and engages in territorial patrols and warfare. Conversely, the
relative neglect of gorillas and orangutans follows from their rarity in captivity which
has led to studies of single subjects rather than the multiple subjects favored in
experimental research. Also, of course, the apparent lack of tool use, hunting, and
warfare in these apes has made them less intriguing to those focused on human
evolution.
The current volume includes recent discoveries revealing that orangutans use a
variety of tools in the wild (Fox, Sitompul, & Van Schaik this volume), and that gorillas
regularly use a variety of tools in captivity (Boysen, Kuhlmeier, Halliday, & Halliday
and Parker et al., this volume). It reveals that gorillas and orangutans show the same rate
© Cambridge University Press www.cambridge.org
Cambridge University Press
0521580277 - The Mentalities of Gorillas and Orangutans: Comparative Perspectives
Edited by Sue Taylor Parker, Robert W. Mitchell and H. Lyn Miles
Frontmatter
More information

PDF PAGE 9
of mirror self-recognition as chimpanzees (Swartz, Sarauw, & Evans, this volume), and
the same kinds of deception (Mitchell, this volume). It also reveals that – like that of
chimpanzees – early sign-language development in gorillas parallels that of human
infants (Bonvillian & Patterson, and Miles, this volume). Other studies in this volume
focus on the abilities of orangutans to imitate gestures and tool use (Call, and Russon,
this volume).
The overall conclusion of this volume is that understanding of human evolution
requires systematic comparison of ourselves with all the great apes not just with
bonobos and chimpanzees (as well as with more distantly related primates). Only
through systematic comparison of these ingroup and outgroup species can we recon-
structthe emergenceof bigger brains, longer childhoods, and longer lives,let alone such
behaviors as intelligent tool use, mirror self recognition, imitation of novel behaviors,
and intentional deception (Parker & Mitchell, this volume). In sum, we hope this work
will help overcome the chimpocentric approach to comparative studies (Beck, 1982).
REFERENCES
Beck, B. (1982) Chimpocentrism: Bias in cognitive ethology.JournalofHumanEvolution,11 , 3–17.
Ko ¨hler, W. (1927).Thementalityofapes, London: Kegan Paul, Trench & Co. Ltd.
Parker, S. T. & Gibson, K. R. (eds.) (1990) ‘‘Language’’ and intelligence in monkeys and apes.
Cambridge University Press.
Parker, S. T., Mitchell, R. W., & Boccia, M. L. (eds.) (1994)Self-awarenessin animalsand humans.
Cambridge University Press.
Russon, A. E. Bard, K., & Parker, S. T. (eds.)Reaching into thought: the minds of the great apes.
Cambridge University Press.
x Preface
© Cambridge University Press www.cambridge.org
Cambridge University Press
0521580277 - The Mentalities of Gorillas and Orangutans: Comparative Perspectives
Edited by Sue Taylor Parker, Robert W. Mitchell and H. Lyn Miles
Frontmatter
More information

PDF PAGE 10
Acknowledgments
The editors of this volume would like to thank some of the many people who helped
contribute to its completion. First, we thank our respective Universities and Depart-
ments, the Department of Anthropology at Sonoma State University, the Department
of Psychology at Eastern Kentucky University, and the Department of Sociology and
Anthropology at the University of Tennessee at Chattanooga. We also thank our
students who have helped shape our understanding of primate behavior. We thank the
many colleagues who have given their support and feedback, our mates and partners
who have given us free reign to work on this project. We acknowledge and thank the
zoological gardens that have encouraged research on their rare gorilla and orangutan
exhibits, especially the San Francisco Zoo. Finally, we thank an anonymous reviewer
for helpful suggestions about including a broader scope of work in the volume, and our
editor at Cambridge, Dr. Tracey Sanderson, for her steady guidance.
© Cambridge University Press www.cambridge.org
Cambridge University Press
0521580277 - The Mentalities of Gorillas and Orangutans: Comparative Perspectives
Edited by Sue Taylor Parker, Robert W. Mitchell and H. Lyn Miles
Frontmatter
More information