PDF PAGE 1
Folia Primatol 1990;54:86-99
© 1990 S. Karger AG, Basel 
0015-5713/90/0542-0086S2.75/0
Tool Use and Tool Making in Wild Chimpanzees
Christophe Boesch, Hedwige Boesch
Ethology and Wildlife Research Department, University of Zürich, Switzerland
Key Words. Chimpanzees •  Tool use •  Tool making •  Ants •  Termites •  Tradition
Abstract. Reported incidences of tool use and tool making for three wild chimpanzee 
populations increase from Mahale (12 and 3 types of use and making, respectively), Gombe 
(16 and 3) to Ta'f (19 and 6). Sticks are commonly used and prepared at all three sites. 
However, Ta'f chimpanzees seem to perform more modifications on the material before using 
it. They are also the only chimpanzees seen to pound objects with tools and to combine two 
different tool uses to get access to one food item. Tool making is the rule for abundant 
material (grass, twigs), but appears to be rarer for scarce, hard material (clubs, stones). Fac­
tors involved in the acquisition and the benefit of tool use are discussed along with factors 
affecting the frequency and complexity of tool making in chimpanzees.
Introduction
The last decades have provided us with a 
wealth of observations from wild animals 
using tools in many different contexts [1,2]. 
To be classified as a tool, an object must be 
held in the hand, foot or mouth and used so 
as to enable the operator to attain an imme­
diate goal [2]. This definition excludes cer­
tain activities considered as tool use by other 
authors, for example nest making by chim­
panzees [3]. Some primates use tools in a 
very flexible way, but in the wild only chim­
panzees have been observed to make tools.
Assessing the complete technological re­
pertoire of one species and the variability 
existing between populations helps us to un­
derstand the uniqueness of tool use and 
making within this species, as well as the fac­
tors affecting the emergence of such behav­
iours within a zoological order (i.e. animals 
with similar physical constraints). However, 
comparisons of the same species between 
study sites or between different species are 
difficult, as observation conditions vary 
greatly in the duration of study (from weeks 
to decades), in the observation methods 
(viewing from a hide to active following of


PDF PAGE 2
Tools of Chimpanzees 87
individuals) and in the living conditions of 
the animals (from captive to free-living). A 
comparison of tool use within a single spe­
cies would limit the impact of phylogenetic 
influences. The chimpanzee (Pan troglo­
dytes) is the best candidate for such an ap­
proach. Data from three long-term studies 
on wild populations in East and West Africa 
now permit for the first time an analysis of 
the impact of natural environmental in­
fluences on tool use and making.
The present paper has three aims: (1) Re­
porting our observations on tool use and 
making in a chimpanzee population living in 
an evergreen tropical rain forest in the Tai 
National Park, Ivory Coast. (2) Comparing 
them with observations made on wild chim­
panzees in the Mahale Mountains National 
Park [3-6] and in the Gombe Stream Na­
tional Park [2, 7-13], These latter two sites 
are located in a savanna/woodland region. 
(3) Trying to understand some of the factors 
affecting tool use and tool making by wild 
chimpanzees.
Methods
The wild chimpanzees of the Ta'i National Park, 
Ivory Coast, have been studied since September 1979. 
At the time of writing, the community we are studying 
includes 80 individuals living in a 27 km2  home range 
in the western part of the park. The area is predomi­
nantly flat with numerous small streams bordered 
with a specific flora. The climate is characterized by 
two rainy seasons (March-June and September-Octo- 
ber) with approximately 1,800 mm rainfall per year.
Tool-use behaviours were only recorded by the 
two of us during the 9-year period on an opportunistic 
basis, whenever they were observed, apart from the 
nut-cracking. Our presence was not constant in the 
field but reached an average duration of 9 months per 
year distributed so as to cover all seasons. However, 
we tried to spend every year the September-March 
period in the field so as to collect data for our priority
projects; the nut-cracking [14-17] and the hunting 
behaviours [18]. Habituation to human observers was 
a slow process and only after 5 years were we able to 
follow by sight some of the males. We did not carry 
out artificial provisioning, but tried to follow the 
chimpanzees by their vocalisations, making visual 
contact whenever possible. It is at present still diffi­
cult to follow some timid females.
Knowing that females seem to be the keenest tool 
users [2, 4], it is not surprising that it took us years to 
have a fair idea of the variety of their tool uses. For 
instance, females practise ant dipping mostly at the 
rear of a party and always interrupted it when we 
approached. We saw this behaviour for the first time 
in autumn 1987, i.e. 8 years after observations 
started. Similarly, in 45 months of initial observation, 
Goodall [7] saw ant dipping only once, although it is 
common in Gombe. This is the primary reason why 
we restrict comparisons in this article to observations 
made on chimpanzee populations habituated to hu­
man observers and studied for many years.
Results
Tool Use in Ta'i Chimpanzees  
Table 1  provides a list of the forms of tool 
use performed by Ta'i chimpanzees: tools are 
used more frequently for feeding than in 
aggressive contexts. Branches, stones and 
twigs are the major raw materials, grass be­
ing absent in the Ta'i forest. We shall now 
analyse some of these tool uses:
Ant Dipping. Ta'i chimpanzees eat driver 
or safari ants from ground nests with the 
help of sticks. Although the ants belong to 
two different species ( Dorylus nigricans and 
Dorylus gerstaeckeri), they behave in a very 
similar way by building their nests in the 
ground and commonly hiding the entrance 
with loose soil. Ta'i chimpanzees regularly 
eat the ant eggs, larvae and pupae by taking 
them directly with the hands from the nest 
(70 observations): they open the nest en­
trance by rapidly and vigourously raking out
