PDF PAGE 1
rsos.royalsocietypublishing.org
Research
Cite this article: Barrett BJ, Monteza-Moreno
CM, Dogandzˇic´ T, Zwyns N, Iba´n˜ez A, Crofoot MC.
2018 Habitual stone-tool-aided extractive
foraging in white-faced capuchins,
Cebus capucinus . R. Soc. open sci. 5: 181002.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1098/rsos.181002
Received: 20 June 2018
Accepted: 25 July 2018
Subject Category:
Biology (whole organism)
Subject Areas:
behaviour/evolution/ecology
Keywords:
tool use, Cebus capucinus , extractive foraging,
evolutionary anthropology, Coiba, primatology
Author for correspondence:
Brendan J. Barrett
e-mail: bbarrett@orn.mpg.de
Electronic supplementary material is available
online at https://dx.doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.
c.4200434
Habitual stone-tool-aided
extractive foraging in
white-faced capuchins,
Cebus capucinus
Brendan J. Barrett 1,2,4,5,6 , Claudio M. Monteza-
Moreno4,5,6,8 , Tamara Dogandzˇic´3,7, Nicolas Zwyns 3,5,
Alicia Iba´n˜ez9 and Margaret C. Crofoot 4,5,6
1Cognitive and Cultural Ecology Group, Max Planck Institute for Ornithology, Radolfzell,
Germany
2Department of Human Behavior, Ecology, and Culture, and 3Department of Human
Evolution, Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology, Leipzig, Germany
4Animal Behavior Graduate Group, University of California, Davis, CA, USA
5Department of Anthropology, University of California, Davis, CA, USA
6Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute, Balboa, Anco ´n, Panama´, Republic of Panama´
7Department of Anthropology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA
8Estacio´n Cientı´fica COIBA-AIP, Ciudad del Saber, Clayton, Panama ´, Republic of Panama´
9Jadwin Av. 108B, Gamboa, Republic of Panama ´
BJB, 0000-0002-2725-2385; CMM-M, 0000-0003-2537-2065;
NZ, 0000-0002-0092-740X
Habitual reliance on tool use is a marked behavioural difference
between wild robust (genus Sapajus) and gracile (genus Cebus)
capuchin monkeys. Despite being well studied and having a
rich repertoire of social and extractive foraging traditions,
Cebus sp. rarely use tools and have never been observed
using stone tools. By contrast, habitual tool use by Sapajus is
widespread. We review theory and discuss factors which
might explain these differences in patterns of tool use between
Cebus and Sapajus. We then report the first case of habitual
stone tool use in a gracile capuchin: a population of white-
faced capuchins ( Cebus capucinus imitator ) in Coiba National
Park, Panama who habitually rely on hammerstone and anvil
tool use to access structurally protected food items in coastal
areas including Terminalia catappa seeds, hermit crabs, marine
snails, terrestrial crabs and other items. This behaviour has
persisted on one island in Coiba National Park since at least
2004. From 1 year of camera trapping, we found that stone
tool use is strongly male-biased. Of the 205 camera trap days
where tool use was recorded, adult females were never
observed to use stone tools, although they were frequently
recorded at the sites and engaged in scrounging behaviour.
Stone tool use occurs year-round in this population; over half
& 2018 The Authors. Published by the Royal Society under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License http:/ /creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/, which permits
unrestricted use, provided the original author and source are credited.
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 28 May 2025 


PDF PAGE 2
of all identifiable individuals were observed participating. At the most active tool use site, 83.2% of
days where capuchins were sighted corresponded with tool use. Capuchins inhabiting the Coiba
archipelago are highly terrestrial, under decreased predation pressure and potentially experience
resource limitation compared to mainland populations—three conditions considered important for
the evolution of stone tool use. White-faced capuchin tool use in Coiba National Park thus offers
unique opportunities to explore the ecological drivers and evolutionary underpinnings of stone
tool use in a comparative within- and between-species context.
1. Introduction
Extractive foraging permits many generalist species to access structurally protected resources. It requires
both physiological specializations and/or cognitive traits that aid in resource manipulation and
extraction. Extractive foraging may permit organisms to outcompete species which lack such
adaptations and may be of great importance in ecologically stressful periods as a fallback foraging
strategy [1]. It is also important to the ecological success and evolutionary history of many primates.
Tool use is a taxonomically widespread [2,3] form of extractive foraging which may permit access to
novel resources, expand diet breadth and may be useful to more efficiently or safely access existing
resources. Comparative studies of tool use are key to understanding the ecological and social factors
that drive its evolution within the primate lineage. In primates, the cognitive skills required for tool
use was probably selected for alongside social and ecological intelligence [4] and generalized problem-
solving [5] (but see [6] for exceptions to this in other taxa). Once tool use evolves it may create
interesting eco-evolutionary feedbacks via gene-culture coevolution and/or cultural niche construction
that are probably important in hominin evolution [7 – 9]. The cultural transmission of toolkits and
associated behaviours is of central importance to human evolution; it is key to our success as the most
widely dispersed vertebrate on Earth.
Comparative studies of stone tool use in non-human primates are of particular interest to
palaeoanthropologists as it provides a model of the possible tool use behaviours that led to the
emergence of earliest known stone tool production in hominins. Percussive techniques like those
observed in non-human primates may have been the precursor to the earliest hominin stone tool
making around 3 Ma [10 – 14]. Thus, a better understanding of tool use in non-human primates helps
us to validate and critically evaluate our interpretations of the fossil and archaeological records [15].
Further, comparative studies of tool use in extant primates allow us to better interpret and understand
what early lithic technologies looked like, how they may have been used by ancient hominins, as well
as how site preservation and visibility (e.g. [10]) affect our ability to interpret the fossil record.
1.1. Differences in tool use between robust and gracile capuchins
Among capuchin monkeys, habitual reliance on tools, and stone tools in particular, has been considered a
distinguishing feature of the larger-bodied robust capuchins ( Sapajus) from the smaller gracile capuchins
(Cebus) since their divergence 6.5 Ma [16]. Stone tool use has been observed in the wild in all well-studied
robust capuchin species including black-striped capuchins, Sapajus libidinosus [17 – 19]; yellow-breasted
capuchins, S. xanthosternos [20]; blonde capuchins, S. flavius [21]; black-horned capuchins, S. nigritus
[22]; and black-capped capuchins, S. apella [23] (based off taxonomic reclassifications [16,24] and
reviews by Ottoni & Izar [25] and Garber et al . [26]). Other forms of tool use, especially the use of
sticks to dig and probe, have also been reported in a population of S. libidinosus [27,28] and more
anecdotally or with single observations in S. apella [29], S. flavius [30] and S. macrocephalus [31].
Using one liberal definition of tool use adapted from Chevalier-Skolnikof [32] (‘the use of one
unattached object to effect a change in another’), many of the combinatorial actions that are habitual
components of the behavioural repertoire of Cebus would qualify as tool use ([33] ch. 7 for a review).
This includes common foraging behaviours like pounding and scrubbing fruits and animal prey on
rocks or branches [34 – 37], as well as their use of branches as fulcrums, and breaking sticks in
aggressive displays [38]. Although there are several reports of Cebus using sticks as clubs, most are
one-time observations [39]; whether this behaviour is intentional or exploratory is debated [33]. This
contrasts with Beck’s [40] more commonly accepted definition where three criteria must be satisfied to
qualify as tool use: the potential tool cannot be part of the animal, must not be attached to the
rsos.royalsocietypublishing.orgR. Soc. open sci.5: 181002
2
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 28 May 2025 


PDF PAGE 3
surrounding environment and must be manipulated to achieve a useful outcome (but see [41] for
inconsistencies regarding use of this definition).
Using this more stringent and widely used definition, tool use is rarely observed in gracile capuchins.
Some social groups of white-faced capuchins, Cebus capucinus imitator , use leaves as sheathes to process
stinging Automeris caterpillars and Sloanea fruits [35,42]. White-fronted capuchins, C. albifrons have been
observed to use leaves as sponges for drinking [43] while white-faced capuchins do the same with leaves,
dried wasp nests and fruits [42]. However, while tools may be helpful for acquiring these resources, they
are not required. No examples of tool use have been reported in wedge-capped capuchins C. olivaceous or
many of the recently reclassified [24,44] and less well-studied species (i.e. C. yuracus, C. unicolor,
C. kaapori, C. versicolor, C. cesarae, C. leucocephalus and C. brunneus ).
Habitual use of tools, and stone tools in particular, is considered one of the defining behavioural
differences between Cebus and Sapajus [45]. The near absence of tool use in gracile capuchins is
puzzling as they are otherwise highly innovative [42] and have a wide array of social [46] and
foraging traditions [35,47,48] which are socially learned [36,49]. In addition, many physiological and
social traits which are associated with tool use, including tolerance of close observation by
conspecifics [34,50], exploratory behaviour [42,51] and dextrous hands [52 – 54] are present in both
gracile and robust capuchins.
1.2. Hypotheses explaining the origins and/or maintenance of tool use
Stone tool use has been observed in only three genera of wild primates: chimpanzees ( Pan troglodytes )
[55,56], robust capuchins ( Sapajus spp.) [25] and macaques ( Macaca fascicularis ) [57,58]. Within each of
these groups, however, significant variation in tool use behaviour exists. This variation warrants
further explanation. There are four commonly evaluated hypotheses to explain the presence and
absence of tool use in animal populations. Fox et al . [59] synthesized three hypotheses for why
primates use tools while another was articulated by Rutz et al . [60].
The necessity hypothesis suggests that ecological need drives stone tool use. The original formulation of
this hypothesis presupposes that resources are distributed in a manner that favours scramble competition
(which may be driven by high population densities) and predicts that tool use will be common in
populations with relatively less favourable energy budgets [59]. The necessity hypothesis primarily
pertains to the evolutionary origins of tool use, but could also account for its maintenance.
Subsequent formulations of this hypothesis have focused on an overall reduction in resource
availability and/or seasonally limited access to food as the causal factor driving tool use innovations
[61,62]. However, current data on environmental seasonality and resource fluctuations may not reflect
the historic environmental conditions experienced by species (or populations) when tool use traditions
emerged. These results must therefore be interpreted with caution.
The opportunity hypothesis posits that increased availability of, and encounter rates with, tool material
and appropriate food resources drives tool use [59]. This hypothesis suggests that tool-using populations
simply live in conditions where they are more likely to encounter materials for tool use and resources
which require tools for extraction. It does not make any assumptions or predictions about differences
in resource distributions or foraging efficiency between tool-using and non-tool-using populations.
The relative profitability hypothesis was originally articulated in studies of tool use in New Caledonian
crows [60,63]. It suggests that tool-aided foraging behaviours are used when they have a better energetic
return rate for accessing structurally protected or embedded foods than non-tool-assisted foraging
techniques. This differs from the necessity hypothesis in that it does not necessarily presuppose any
differences in resource abundances between tool-using and non-tool-using populations or species [64].
Further, in contrast with the necessity hypothesis, the relative profitability hypothesis is primarily
concerned with the maintenance of tool-using behaviours as a function of their increased economic
utility, rather than their evolutionary origins.
The limited invention hypothesis [59] is less commonly discussed, as it is difficult (or impossible) to
empirically test (but see [64]). It states that tool use may be invented rarely, or might be difficult
to spread and/or maintain, and therefore the patterns of tool use we observe across species and
populations are driven by neutral evolutionary processes rather than natural selection. This hypothesis
predicts that instances of tool use might occur in disparate geographical areas where barriers to
dispersal and cultural transmission exist and that more frequent or complicated tool use will occur
under conditions where constraints on transmission are relaxed. Barriers to dispersal and cultural
transmission may be social, cognitive or geographical. Fox et al . [59] argued that the limited invention
hypothesis is supported when no evidence for the first two can be found. However, it is possible that
rsos.royalsocietypublishing.orgR. Soc. open sci.5: 181002
3
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 28 May 2025 


PDF PAGE 4
the origins of a behaviour might be favoured by selective pressures consistent with the necessity
hypothesis or historical factors (the environment an animal evolved in) consistent with the
opportunity hypotheses. Maintenance may be affected by factors consistent with the limited invention
hypothesis.
Addressing these four hypotheses is challenging as they are not mutually exclusive. Within-species
comparisons provide support for all of them ([61,64] for reviews). Within-population support in
Brazilian populations of S. libidinosus for the opportunity hypothesis has been found for nut cracking
with stone tools at Fazenda Boa Vista [65] and using stones to dig for invertebrates and tubers at
Serra da Capivara National Park [66]. Between-species comparisons of chimpanzees and bonobos did
not find support for the necessity, opportunity or limited invention hypotheses and instead put forth
that the ancestral ecological conditions in the Pleistocene might explain current behavioural variation
[64]. Current environmental conditions may not reflect the historic ecological or social conditions that
favoured the origins of tool use. The spatial scales of resource availability and territory size may
differentially favour tool use in closely neighbouring populations of the same species, so habitat-wide
information may not be of use to particular social groups. The temporal scales in which resource
bottlenecks occur that make tool-aided extractive foraging necessary for population persistence may
also not be captured on the timescale of a typical research project. For these reasons, it is important to
be precise regarding if we are addressing the origins/and or maintenance of tool use and endeavour
to collect data on temporal or spatial scales that are most applicable to our hypotheses.
Another challenge about addressing these hypotheses is that the spatial and temporal scales at which
we explore them may exist on different levels of biological organization [67]. Also, these hypotheses
probably blur the lines between the proximate – ultimate distinction [68]. The opportunity hypothesis,
when viewed over evolutionary time, is a question about the historic environmental conditions in
which ancestral populations evolved and whether they were conducive towards tool use. However, it
is often treated as a hypothesis about proximate mechanisms: is stone tool use more likely to develop
in social groups or species that are more likely to encounter stone tools in their environment? This
contrasts with the necessity hypothesis and relative profitability hypothesis which focus on ultimate
causation, ecological function and fitness outcomes. The limited invention hypothesis, by contrast,
focuses on the proximate factors which affect the spread of an adaptive tradition which may
subsequently affect fitness outcomes. This interaction between both levels of biological organization is
probably important for understanding the distribution of tool use behaviour among primates.
1.3. Important factors in explaining variation in tool use in capuchins
Prior work has identified several factors which may explain variation in tool use among extant primates
and what affects the origins and maintenance of this behaviour [18,59,61,69,70]. These factors include
resource limitation due to seasonal reductions in food abundance (i.e. tool use as a fallback strategy),
high abundance of nutritious, embedded foods which require tools to access, low dietary richness,
availability of stones and anvil sites, increased terrestriality and low predation risk.
Sufficient abundance of embedded foods and availability of tool-making materials are necessary
preconditions for stone tool use. They provide a proximate explanation for why stone tool use is
present (or absent) in a particular group or species. The abundance and nutritional quality of
resources are also important in addressing the relative profitability hypotheses. Resource limitation,
low dietary richness, increased terrestriality and low predation risk impact the relative benefits and
costs of tool use, providing an evolutionary explanation for why tool use arises and persists in some
cases but not others.
The distribution of stone tool use among Sapajus populations supports the hypothesis that resource
limitation and low dietary richness may favour the evolution of this behavioural strategy; tool-using
Sapajus populations tend to live in drier, more seasonal areas such as the Cerrado and Caatinga of
Brazil which have less primary productivity, plant richness and fruit abundance compared to
populations living in the rainier, more productive, species-rich Amazon forest [69]. It has also been
proposed to be a difference between gracile capuchins in central America and robust capuchins in
drier regions of Brazil. However, populations of Cebus live in diverse tropical ecosystems including
seasonal dry forests (where the majority of well-studied populations live), primary and secondary rain
forests and montane cloud forests. To date, no studies have compared extractive foraging or tool use
across these ecosystems within Cebus. The hypothesis that organisms will rely on tool use as a fallback
strategy when easy to process fruits are seasonally limited [1] receives support in robust capuchins
and chimpanzees [61,71]. However, populations of C. capucinus rely more on extractive foraging
rsos.royalsocietypublishing.orgR. Soc. open sci.5: 181002
4
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 28 May 2025 


PDF PAGE 5
of embedded insects and become more terrestrial when resources are limited at the end of the dry
season [50,72].
The relative profitability hypothesis has not been directly compared between populations of tool-
using and non-tool-using capuchins. If a resource is abundant, easily encountered and of particularly
high quality, perhaps the costs of learning and using tool use will be compensated for by increased
nutritional returns. Structurally protected foods which require tool use might be included in the diet if
other resources in the environment are sufficiently rare or are of low nutritional quality in accordance
with optimal foraging models [73,74]. Additionally, resource abundance and quality is likely to
interact with dietary richness, and an increased reliance on tool use might be favoured when there are
a limited set of food options available. However, any hypothesis about foraging optimality in
primates might be better informed by social foraging models [75]. Tool use often generates producer –
scrounger dynamics, which also affects the probability that a foraging behaviour will be culturally
transmitted [76]. If age or sex differences in the efficiency or proclivity to use stone tools exist, we
might predict different reliance on tool use across age and sex classes and potential indirect impacts
of social behaviour.
Reduced dietary richness might also explain the difference between tool-using and non-tool-using
populations of Sapajus and Cebus. Groups which live in areas with fewer potential diet items, such as
islands or low-quality habitats, may be forced to innovate and invest in potentially costly behavioural
experimentation to make the best of a bad situation. It is also possible that differences in tool use rates
might be influenced by ranging patterns. Gracile capuchins have larger home ranges than robust
capuchins, on average (reviewed in [45,77]), and thus might be able to access a more diverse set of
food items that do not require tool use compared to robust capuchins. However, it is also possible
that groups of robust capuchins are just more capable of extracting resources out of a smaller area due
to morphological specializations such as thicker enamel and larger molars [16].
Stones are needed for stone tools to be used. High availability of the necessary raw materials in the
environment increases the probability that an individual will interact with them and innovate stone tool
use. The importance of such opportunities for innovation is supported by within- Sapajus variation in
stone tool use. Populations of Sapajus (and Cebus) living in the alluvial floodplains of the Amazon, for
example, have less access to stones than populations living in rockier, drier habitats, and do not use
stone tools [69]. However, while the availability of raw materials may drive some within-genus or
within-species variation, it is unlikely to explain broader taxonomic differences in stone tool use;
within any Cebus or Sapajus species’ range there exists considerable geological variation.
Increased terrestriality might explain the presence of stone tool use [70,78] consistent with the
opportunity hypothesis. Individuals are more likely to encounter and wield stone tools on the ground
than in the canopy. However, both C. capucinus and C. albiforns [79] can be exceptionally terrestrial,
sometimes in response to seasonal fluctuations in fruit availability [72], yet, no previously studied
populations of Cebus appear to use tools of any kind with any great frequency.
Decreased predation risk may lead arboreal species to become more terrestrial (Monteza-Moreno et al.
[80]), thus, making them more likely to invent or use stone tools on the forest floor. However, the absence
of predators might also affect ecological competition between conspecifics and heterospecifics with niche
overlap. Increased within- and between-species competition may affect both population density and
ranging behaviours of a candidate tool-using species and the abundance of heterospecifics with niche
overlap, creating feedback loops which negatively affect species richness and abundance which may
further favour the evolution of tool use. Reduced predation risk may also directly affect the probability
of stone tool use by creating safe conditions where animals can afford exploratory behaviour,
potentially leading to the innovation of tool use [60,81]. Stone tool use, in particular, may also directly
attract predators; it is a loud, conspicuous activity that often occurs in predictable areas where
resources are clustered, making tool-using individuals easy targets for predators. Stone tool use also
requires concentration, thus decreasing an organism’s ability to be vigilant. Differences in predation
risk may explain both within- and between-species variability in tool use.
2. Study site
Coiba National Park in the Gulf of Chiriqu ı´ of Panama is an archipelago encompassing nine larger
islands and more than 100 islets. The main island, Coiba, lies 23 km off Panama’s Pacific coast and
has been geographically isolated from the mainland for 12 000 – 18 000 years [82]. Coiba National Park
has significant ecological variation: moist and wet forest account for 60% of its habitat types [83], and
rsos.royalsocietypublishing.orgR. Soc. open sci.5: 181002
5
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 28 May 2025 


PDF PAGE 6
the park also includes mangroves and swamp forests. Coiba National Park receives 3500 mm of rain per
year which primarily falls during a marked wet season (May – December). Coiba National Park (CNP)
contains one of the largest remaining parcels of Pacific Central American forest; 75% of the park
consists of mature forest, due to the island of Coiba’s historic (until 2004) role as a penal colony [84].
Prior to the penal era which began in 1919, the archipelago (including the islands which contain
capuchin monkeys) was utilized and inhabited by indigenous people who probably arrived from the
Azuero Peninsula as early as 250 CE and by subsequent groups from modern-day Chiriqu ı´ and Cocle´
[85]. Europeans first arrived in Coiba in 1551; subsequent genocide, disease and enslavement by
Spanish colonists eliminated indigenous populations on the island by the end of the sixteenth century
[82]. During penal colony times, up to 1000 prisoners and their guards lived in 20 prison camps,
mostly along the east coast of Coiba, and including one in the northern coast of Jicaro ´ n. Currently,
only two islands in CNP have any constant human occupation including a research station on
Rancherı´a and a police station and national park visitors centre on the northeast portion of Coiba. The
other islands, including Jicaro ´ n, have no recent long-term human settlement; human – wildlife
interactions are rare and mostly restricted to occasional interactions with local fishermen and tourists
along the coast.
Coiba National Park is a UNESCO world heritage site and is a hotspot for marine and terrestrial plant
and animal endemism [83,86 – 90], much of which is understudied. This includes five endemic species
and subspecies of terrestrial mammals: the Coiban agouti Dasyprocta coibae , Coiba Island or
Rothschilds’ white-tail deer Odocoileus virginianus rothschildi , Coiba Island howler monkey Alouatta
palliata coibensis or Alouatta coibensis , black-eared opossum Didelphis marsupialis battyi and potentially a
rodent of the genus Zygodontomys [91].
Three of the largest islands in Coiba National Park, Coiba (50 314 ha), Jicaro´ n (2002 ha) and Rancher ı´a
(222 ha) support populations of capuchin monkeys ( C. capucinus imitator ) (electronic supplementary
material, figure S1). Observations from a 12-day survey in 1974 estimated capuchin group sizes on
Coiba to be similar to mainland populations at Barro Colorado Island [84]. Later estimates [92] show
similar group sizes with a mean of 10.75 individuals (range 5 – 16) and suggest that capuchins on
Coiba Island occur at low densities. However, an increased sampling effort, different surveying
methodologies (such as randomization, camera trapping and mark-recapture analysis) and recent
advances in analytical approaches might yield a different estimate. Longitudinal studies in Costa Rica
show larger maximum annual group size with much variance (mean ¼ 23.20, s.d. ¼ 9.26, range ¼ 5 – 40,
estimated from 20 years of data in fig. 7.1 in [93]). Our qualitative impression on Jicaro ´ n shows group
sizes up to an estimated 20 individuals and at potentially high population densities. However, more
systematic data collection, increased sampling effort and nuanced analysis is needed to make reliable
comparisons of group size and population density, so current estimates should be considered tentative.
Capuchins living on the islands within the Coiban archipelago provide a natural laboratory for
examining hypotheses about the evolutionary drivers of tool use. Populations are geographically
isolated by the ocean, strongly limiting genetic flow and cultural transmission. Additionally, the three
islands differ in the number of potential food items available to capuchins, following well-established
patterns of species richness varying as a function of distance from the mainland and island area [94].
Plant richness on Coiba is less than what is observed in similar forests on the Panamanian mainland
[95]. Transect data (Iba´n˜ ez et al. [96]) show that Coiba, the largest island, located in the middle of the
archipelago, is home to 1001 plant species. Jicaro ´ n (the most distant island) and Rancher ı´a, by
contrast, host similarly depauperate plant communities (261 and 262 species, respectively), despite a
nearly 10-fold difference in size [97]. Smaller islands are also more likely to suffer from ecological
perturbations due to edge effects. These two factors combined with the highly terrestrial behaviour of
capuchins in Coiba National Park (which may increase encounter rates with material for stone tool
use) due to an absence of terrestrial predators on the islands [84] provides ample opportunity (and
decreases potential costs) for capuchins to use stone tools.
3. Methods
3.1. Coastal surveys
In 2004, A. Iba´n˜ ez first observed capuchins using stone tools to crack open the endocarps of Terminalia
catappa—a coastal tree from Asia which has been nativized in the Neotropics and is known commonly in
Spanish as almendro de playa and in English as sea almonds . Following up on this initial report, a
rsos.royalsocietypublishing.orgR. Soc. open sci.5: 181002
6
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 28 May 2025 


PDF PAGE 7
documentary field crew captured this nut-cracking behaviour on film in 2013 (Paul Stewart and Huw
Cordey 2017, personal communication). To further document and determine the extent of this unique
behavioural variant, we conducted field surveys from March 2017 to March 2018. B. Barrett and
C. Monteza-Moreno surveyed the coasts of Jicaro ´ n, Coiba and Rancher ı´a by boat to identify T. catappa
groves. We then surveyed these islands, including the entirety of the coasts of Jicaro ´ n and Rancher ı´a
at least twice, on foot to look for evidence of tool use, including broken endocarps, hammerstones
and anvils, cracked crab and bivalve shells and coconuts. We also surveyed approximately 8 km of the
coast of Coiba with rocky intertidal zones and/or T. catappa groves.
3.2. Camera trapping effort
To assess potential tool use sites, we deployed unbaited photo (Hyperfire HC600) and video (Ultrafire
XR6) camera traps (Reconyx, Inc, WI, USA) between 25 March 2017 and 26 March 2018. Photo-
trapping is advantageous for recording localized tool use for unhabituated primates in remote areas
[98]. Photo camera traps were set to take a series of 10 images per trigger event with no delay
between triggers, allowing us to document behavioural sequences. Video camera traps captured
sequences consisting of one photo followed by 30 s of film per trigger. We deployed cameras at 35
sites on the islands of Coiba (four sites, 532 trap-nights), Jicaro ´ n (30 sites, 3466 trap-nights) and
Rancherı´a (one site, 148 trap-nights) (figure 1). At four sites (two Coiba, one Rancher ı´a, one Jicaro´ n)
where we found almendros and capuchins but few rocks, we set up experimental anvils and
hammerstones to see if capuchins would use them.
3.3. Weighing and scanning tools
Graphic documentation in the field consisted of geo-located digital pictures of sites and tools, three-
dimensional models of sites using geo-referenced images (Agisoft Photoscan), hand-made and digital
mapping and situational sketches. The use of this set of standardized archaeological methods
facilitates comparison with archaeological sites (and any others when the same protocols are used).
Using a digital scale, we weighed a subset of the hammerstones ( N ¼ 60) used in the behavioural
sequences captured by our camera traps or observed during coastal surveys (i.e. stones which were
piled on broken Terminalia endocarps, resting on coastal driftwood). Broken hammers were refitted on
site before being weighted. A set of photographs of several of these tools were taken with a goal to
create three-dimensional models according to protocols established by Porter et al . [99].
date (YYYYMMDD)
camera station
2017040120170501 2017060120170701 20170801 2017090120171001 2017110120171201 20180101 2018020120180301
Coiba
Jicaron
Rancheria
Cebus–23–01
Cebus–01–01
Cebus–02–01
Cebus–02–02
Cebus–03–01
Cebus–03–02
Cebus–04–01
Cebus–05–01
Cebus–06–01
Cebus–07–01
Cebus–07–02
Cebus–08–01
Cebus–09–01
Cebus–09–02
Cebus–10–01
Cebus–11–01
Cebus–12–01
Cebus–03–03
Cebus–13–01
Cebus–14–01
Cebus–15–01
Cebus–16–01
Cebus–17–01
Cebus–17–02
Cebus–17–03
Cebus–18–01
Cebus–19–01
Cebus–20–01
Cebus–21–01
Cebus–03–04
Cebus–07–03
Cebus–15–02
Cebus–15–03
Cebus–16–02
Cebus–22–01
Figure 1. Visualization of camera trap sampling effort. Rows are camera trap locations. Smaller lines indicate length of deployment,
thick lines indicate period of deployment when camera was filming and focused on tool use site (i.e. was not moved by animals,
had working batteries, was not stolen or vandalized). Diamond points occur at each day where stone tool use was recorded. Colours
indicate island in Coiba National Park.
rsos.royalsocietypublishing.orgR. Soc. open sci.5: 181002
7
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 28 May 2025 


PDF PAGE 8
3.4. Statistics
To estimate the size of stone tools and monthly rates of tool use across camera stations, we used
generalized linear models (GLM) and generalized linear mixed effect models (GLMM) fit using the
map2stan function in the rethinking package (v. 1.59) [100] in R (v. 3.43) [101]. map2stan is a front-
end which utilizes rSTAN (v. 2.17.2), a Hamiltonian MCMC sampling engine [102]. To estimate mean
stone tool size, we fit a Gamma GLM using a log link as stone tool weights are positive, non-normal
and lower-bound by zero. To estimate monthly tool use rates, we used an aggregated binomial
GLMM with a logit link. To analyse stone tool use rates, we analysed a subset of camera trap data
where stone tool use was observed at least once. Our outcome was the number of days per month
where tool use was observed at each camera station and the number of trials was the number of days
per month where a camera recorded a capuchin at least once. We estimated varying intercepts for
each camera station ( N ¼ 7), camera station deployment ( N ¼ 13) and unique month ( N ¼ 12). All
data, model and graphing code for this paper can be found at this manuscript’s corresponding
GitHub repository. These annual rates are a coarse, preliminary measure of stone tool use in this
population and future analyses will account for inter-individual and monthly variation in tool use
rate at more consistently sampled tool use sites.
4. Findings
4.1. Habitual reliance on stone-tool-aided extractive foraging in white-faced capuchins
We found that capuchins on Jicaro´ n in Coiba National Park habitually use stone tools to open a variety of
food resources including T. catappa endocarps (figure 2; electronic supplementary material, video S1),
hermit crabs (figure 4 c; electronic supplementary material, video S1) and halloween crabs ( Gecarcinus
quadratus) (figure 4 b,d ). Coconuts ( Cocos nucifera ) (electronic supplementary material, figure S3) and
marine snails are also processed with a hammerstone and anvil, although we observe it much less
frequently. At the most active tool use site, 83.2% of days where capuchins were observed
corresponded with tool use (figure 3). Middens of T. catappa shells, coconut husks and tool shards are
readily apparent at tool use sites (figures 4 b,5c). Coconuts are commonly eaten by capuchins but they
(a)
(c) (d)
(b)
Figure 2. (a) A juvenile male capuchin uses a hammerstone to crack open a T. catappa endocarp on a stone anvil. ( b) An adult male
after cracking open a T. catappa endocarp on a wooden anvil. ( c) Juvenile male capuchin observing an older juvenile processing
T. catappa endocarps with a hammerstone. ( d ) Juvenile male about to process T. catappa—note prehensile tail used for support.
rsos.royalsocietypublishing.orgR. Soc. open sci.5: 181002
8
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 28 May 2025 


PDF PAGE 9
are almost always opened using only a stone or wooden anvil, as has been described on Coiba Island [37]
and is widespread across Jicaro´ n. At the tool use site, juveniles primarily use stones to pound coconut
flesh from husk shards after they have been opened—using a hammerstone, so far, appears uncommon.
Temporary tool use occupations are also commonly observed in the intertidal and are regularly
wiped out by daily changes in the tide (figure 5 a). Small- and medium-sized occupations are located
(a)
(c) (d)
(b)
Figure 4. Wooden ( a,c) and stone anvils ( b,d) used by capuchins to process structurally protected foods. Note accumulation of
processed materials including old endocarps, coconut husks and shells in ( a,b). ( c) Hermit crab exoskeleton and shell remains
processed with a stone tool on dead tree branch. ( b,d ) Stone hammer on stone anvil with T. catappa endocarps and
halloween crab remains. The leaf stuck under the hammer in ( d) indicates that the food was processed shortly before
discovery. Percussion impacts can be observed on the crab limb.
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
0
2
4
6
8
monthly proportion of days where tool use was observed
posterior density
Figure 3. Tool use sites differed greatly in their observed usage. On average, tool use was observed at each camera site on 45.3% of
days where capuchins were observed. Cameras at the most active tool use sites (orange curve on far right) recorded tool use on 83.2% of
the days where capuchins were observed. Curves show posterior predictions of probability of observing tool use on each day conditional
on observing a capuchin across all months. Colours correspond to camera stations. Points on X-axis are raw proportions.
rsos.royalsocietypublishing.orgR. Soc. open sci.5: 181002
9
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 28 May 2025 


PDF PAGE 10
within dry stream beds (figure 5 b) and larger accumulations of processed food lie on higher ground
(figure 5 c). This situation suggests that the joint effect of the tide and seasonal activity of the stream
impact site formation processes and thereby, may affect site visibility. Further, during coastal surveys,
we observed stones piled on broken clam shells at the edge of the intertidal zone, consistent with
capuchins using stone tools to exploit this rich marine resource (electronic supplementary material,
figure S2). In some instances, the stones were spaced in a regular pattern, at distances similar to the
inter-individual distances observed in foraging capuchins. Destruction of cameras by vandals and
harsh marine conditions prevented us from confirming this behaviour.
In contrast with Jicaro´ n, our initial coastal surveys and camera trapping failed to return evidence of stone
tool use by capuchins on the islands of Coiba or Rancherı´a (figure 1). This occurs despite the presence of the
necessary lithic materials and structurally embedded foods on all three islands. Halloween crabs, hermit
crabs, marine snails, coconuts and T. catappa occur on all islands. Abundances of T. catappa trees are
currently being estimated, but preliminary observation suggests that they are relatively rarer on
Rancherı´a. Groves of similar (or higher) densities occur on sections of Coiba and Rancher ı´a where we
have not observed stone tool use. Future studies will address the relative abundances within and
between islands of the other two primary processed food items—halloween crabs and hermit crabs. We
did not observe tool use at any of the artificial anvil sites we set up on the islands (figure 1).
4.2. Description of stone tools
Capuchin tool use primarily consisted of pounding food items using a hammerstone. Preliminary
observations indicate that the pounding technique is direct percussion with a hard hammer ( sensu
[103], figure 2; electronic supplementary material, video S1). Food items were placed on stationary
anvils of mineral or organic material (figures 3 and 4). Mineral anvils included rocky outcroppings
and bedrock along stream banks, in the forest interior and in the intertidal zone (figure 5). In cases
where stones were used as anvils, this technique could have produced a rebound force. Large fallen
trees and logs in the forest and washed up in the intertidal zone were also used for pounding, as
were the bases of trees and tree branches. In some cases, hammerstones were transported 2 – 3 m up
into the canopy. When used as a support for pounding, wood is less likely to produce a rebound
force, suggesting a use of wood as a stand-on surface to increase the accuracy of the strike or easy
collection of the food item.
Capuchins primarily used cobbles collected from streams as hammerstones (figure 6). In some cases,
stones from the marine intertidal and eroded hillsides were also used to process food items. A sample of
the tools randomly collected on trips in July 2017, January 2018 and March 2018 from 60 tool use sites
used by capuchins on Jicaro ´ n varied greatly in mass (mean ¼ 740.7 g, s.d. 402.7, range 172 – 2256 g, n
60; figure 7). Capuchins used large stones—one weighing more than 2 kg—to process T. catappa ,
adopting a two-handed grip with a bipedal stance, and often using their semi-prehensile tails for
support and leverage. By contrast, smaller items such as hermit crabs and snails were cracked with a
two- or one-handed grip in a crouching position.
Based on our photographic evidence and surveys, both hammerstones (electronic supplementary
material, figure S4) and food items were sometimes transported to the tool use sites (electronic
supplementary material, video S1). Terminalia catappa endocarps, for example, were often collected
multiply underneath T. catappa trees at the shoreline and transported to anvil sites deeper in the
forest. In this population, the use of stone tools is heavily male-biased. Over the course of 1 year, we
(a) (c)(b)
Figure 5. (a) Elusive tool use occupation in the intertidal zone that is regularly destroyed by daily tidal changes. (b) Medium-sized tool
use occupation along stream bank that is destroyed less regularly by seasonal floods. ( c) Large tool use occupation lying on higher
ground away from streams and shore. Accumulation of tools and processed food shows potential for archaeological excavation.
rsos.royalsocietypublishing.orgR. Soc. open sci.5: 181002
10
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 28 May 2025 


PDF PAGE 11
did not observe a single adult female use stone tools despite them commonly engaging in scrounging
behaviour in the vicinity. Tool use in this population also generates interest and close-range
observation from conspecifics, providing opportunities for social learning (figure 2 c; electronic
supplementary material, video S1).
5. Discussion
This is the first description of habitual stone tool use in gracile capuchin monkeys, adding Cebus to the list
of primate genera with populations who habitually use stone tools in the wild ( Sapajus, Macaca, Pan). Tool
use by capuchins on Jicaro´ n shares key features with the patterns of behaviour described in long-tailed
macaque populations in Thailand: stone tool use occurs solely on islands and is focused on coastal
resources [104]. Another similarity to long-tailed macaques is that multiple hammering techniques are
used to process particular types of prey [105]; however, the observed behavioural diversity appears to
be less in these capuchins than macaques. At first glance, it appears that capuchins use stone tools
more for plant materials than marine invertebrates. However, the absence of direct observation in an
(a)
(b)
Figure 6. Examples of hammerstones from Jicaro ´n sites used for nut-cracking weighing ( a) 989 g and ( b) 1202 g.
rsos.royalsocietypublishing.orgR. Soc. open sci.5: 181002
11
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 28 May 2025 


PDF PAGE 12
unhabituated population and the challenges of placing camera traps in the intertidal zone (where
mounting points are rare and destruction by tides and potentially dangerous narcotics traffickers is
common) currently limit our ability to fully understand the scope and frequency of tool use for
marine invertebrates without direct observation.
The patterns of tool use observed in capuchins on Jicaro ´ n also share many similarities with
nut-cracking behaviour in Sapajus. Individuals habitually re-used tools and favoured a small number
of repeatedly visited tool use sites to which they transported tools and materials for processing. The
accumulation of debris at these tool use sites and the comparatively dry climate on Jicaro ´ n offers
potential for preservation and archaeological excavation.
Gracile capuchin tool use is also similar to chimpanzees in that capuchins transport both processing
material and stone tools to particular anvil sites that are re-used over time. However, tool use also
appears more sporadically in space. This population of Cebus, several populations of long-tailed
macaques in Thailand [104,106], and some populations of Sapajus [107] target one of the same
species—T. catappa . This provides a unique opportunity to directly compare tool use behaviour,
quantify differences in foraging efficiency, material choice and the social behaviours surrounding tool
use for an identical resource across three primate species in the wild.
Stone tool use appears to have some potential seasonality—the lowest rates of tool use occurred in the
transition periods between wet and dry season (figure 8). This pattern differs from what has been
observed with extractive foraging behaviours in Cebus in neotropical dry forests [50,72] where
extractive foraging increases in the transition periods between seasons. More rigorous analysis of both
behavioural and ecological data in a comparable manner is needed to verify this observation.
Similar to robust capuchins [17,28,108,109], but unlike in chimpanzees [110,111], we observe a male
sex-bias in tool use (in macaques the bias differs depending on the type of tool use and food processed
[112]). Despite this species having the largest degree of sexual dimorphism of any robust or gracile
capuchin species and being the smallest observed wild primate species to habitually use stone tools
(adult males weigh 3 – 3.8 kg and adult females weigh 2 – 3 kg [33]), we do not think this sex difference
is due to differences in body size. Juveniles much smaller than adult females habitually use tools.
Even if future observations do show adult female capuchins using tools, this difference is startling.
Potential differences for this behaviour might be differing foraging behaviours among male and
females—perhaps females are allowed access to better quality resources in fruiting trees and do not
need to use stone tools to acquire adequate nutrition. Another possibility is that sex differences in
the visual systems make it easier for dichromatic males to detect camouflaged almendra fruits on the
forest floor compared to females who are better at detecting contrasting colours [113]. There also may
0 500 1000 1500 2000
mean stone tool weight (g)
Figure 7. Model predictions from a gamma GLM of mean stone tool weight. Dark line is posterior mean estimate, while lighter lines
are 100 randomly sampled posterior predictions to visualize uncertainty.
rsos.royalsocietypublishing.orgR. Soc. open sci.5: 181002
12
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 28 May 2025 


PDF PAGE 13
be sex differences in proclivity for combinatorial actions as has been observed in S. apella [114]. Perhaps
males are simply more likely to spend time on the ground than females as in other species of New World
monkeys [115], increasing the odds that they will use tools. High population densities and resource
limitation on this island might favour a reversal in philopatry from female-biased to male-biased; on a
resource-limited island with high population densities, we might predict females to be the dispersing
sex [116]. Thus, adult females in this group who did use tools may have emigrated to another area
where we did not observe or detect them using tools and adult females we observe in this group are
natal to non-tool-using groups. The presence of a localized tradition solely in the (typically)
non-philopatric sex is puzzling, and something we are excited to address in the future.
5.1. Ecology of stone tool use
Capuchins in Coiba National Park spend an unusually high percentage of their time travelling and foraging
on the ground [84], which may be due to the absence of terrestrial predators on these islands (Monteza-
Moreno et al. [80]). By providing opportunities for capuchins to interact with and manipulate stones, this
expansion into the terrestrial niche may have facilitated the emergence of this plausible cultural tradition.
Additionally, the islands of Coiba National Park are particularly prone to climatic variation from El
Nin˜ o – Southern Oscillation (ENSO) cycles [117], edge effects and climate change. These factors,
combined with a decrease in dietary richness, might drive foraging innovation in times of resource scarcity.
It is important to note that stone tool uses on Jicaro´n appears to be limited to particular sections of the
island. Based on our current observations, it is probably limited to a single group along the coast, despite
the availability of the necessary resources in other coastal areas. We have yet to find any evidence of stone
tool use on the coasts of Coiba or Rancherı´a (figure 1), but surveys are still underway. Further, many of the
resources which capuchins on Jicaro´ n process using stone tools are available to and eaten by other white-
faced capuchin populations including hermit crabs [118], halloween crabs (B. Barrett 2017, personal
observation), marine snails and coconuts [37]. Fleshy exocarps of T. catappa are consumed by other
capuchin groups across Coiba National Park and in Costa Rica [119]—however, capuchins are unable to
access the nutritious endocarps without tools. This begs the question: why does this variation exist? How
does between-group and between-island dispersal structure cultural and genetic variation?
It is possible that there may exist undetected tool-using populations in other areas of Coiba National
Park. As previously noted, site preservation might have an impact on the visibility of tool use but it is
unlikely to obliterate all signs of such behaviour. Additionally, the rugged topography and size of the
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
month
monthly proportion of days where tool use was observed
Mar 2017 April 2017 May 2017 June 2017 July 2017 Aug 2017 Sept 2017 Oct 2017 Nov 2017 Dec 2017 Jan 2018 Feb 2018 Mar 2018
Figure 8. Tool use rates appear lowest in the transition months from dry to wet (April and May) and wet to dry (November)
seasons. Graph shows model predictions of the probability of observing tool use per day for each month conditional on
observing a capuchin at each camera site. Grey diamonds lie at posterior mean estimate while lines indicate 89% posterior
credible interval. Each colour is a raw proportion per camera deployment which corresponds with a camera trap station.
rsos.royalsocietypublishing.orgR. Soc. open sci.5: 181002
13
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 28 May 2025 


PDF PAGE 14
islands, limited accessibility of many locations by boat or foot and prevalence of cliffs and mangrove
swamps on long stretches of coast prevent us from safely conducting randomized surveys for tool
use—particularly on Coiba. Another limitation in identifying tool use on other islands is that our
camera trapping effort was not proportional to island area or habitat type, as our primary aim in this
initial round of research was to focus on describing a behaviour in areas and islands where we knew
tool use was likely to have occurred given logistical and financial constraints. For these reasons, we
have used targeted sampling and focused on looking for evidence of tool use in areas where we
would predict it to exist: rocky intertidal zones with access to forest interior, areas where T. catappa is
common, underneath trees with hard, structurally protected fruits in the forest interior and along
rocky, seasonally dry stream beds. Further surveys of the forest interiors of Jicaro ´ n and Coiba and
along the coast of Coiba Island are planned for future expeditions and our uncertainty of absence on
coastal areas will be quantified relative to sampling effort. We hope to further increase camera
trapping effort on Coiba and Jicaro ´ n in the future. We can also not rule out that ecological differences
between Jicaro´ n and populations on other islands and the mainland cannot explain the patterns of
tool use we observe. Addressing this is a promising future direction, and to achieve this systematic,
longitudinal data on resource availability and abundance at each site would be needed.
5.2. Conservation implications
How isolated populations fare is a major conservation concern, and island systems provide an
opportunity to explore the impacts of long-term isolation [83] and small population size while
providing insight into how rapid anthropogenic change may affect threatened mammal populations
due to species invasions [120] and climate change [121,122]. The capuchins of Coiba National Park are
an excellent study system to understand how geographical isolation affects both genetic and cultural
diversity, and the ability of these two interacting inheritance systems to facilitate species’ responses to
environmental change. Evidence of amelanism for capuchins on the island of Coiba [89] is consistent
with increased homozygosity due to founder effects or inbreeding. Yet the observed behavioural
flexibility of capuchins on Jicaro ´ n displayed in this paper and of capuchins on Coiba [37] suggest that
they are behaviourally adapting to island life—potentially through social learning. Continued
investigations into the behavioural flexibility of capuchins living in the Coiban archipelago through
foraging innovation or behavioural and social flexibility will provide insight into the contributions of
genetic and cultural variability in responding to ecological stress in a primate population.
One noticeable observation, is that some coastal populations of capuchins in Coiba National Park,
including the one at the tool use sites, can be exposed to tremendous amounts of anthropogenic
plastic waste which washes ashore from the Pacific ocean (electronic supplementary material, video
S1). While primates occasionally appear to search for embedded foods in this debris, as they would
browse for embedded arthropods in the leaf litter, how anthropogenic marine plastic that washes
ashore impacts mammalian health and behaviour is a potentially important avenue of inquiry to
examine in Coiba National Park.
5.3. Taxonomic status
Lastly, evaluating the taxonomic status of capuchin monkeys living in Coiba National Park is essential.
Knowing whether these capuchins are an endemic species or subspecies will be important in affecting
conservation decisions in an area that is threatened by development and climate change [90]. Coiba is
home to an endemic subspecies of howler monkey, A. palliata coibensis [123,124], which some consider
to be its own species, A. coibensis [92,125]. However, no similar genetic or morphological comparisons
of Coiban archipelago versus mainland capuchin populations have been undertaken to determine
if the Coiban capuchins are taxonomically unique. Capuchin samples collected in Coiba National
Park in the early twentieth century were smaller than mainland samples ([126]; pp. 232 – 233), an
observation consistent with the ‘island rule’—that larger mammals tend to become smaller on islands
to cope with resource limitation [127,128]. Analysis of the genetic diversity of capuchins living across
the archipelago and those of the nearby Panamanian mainland will help address taxonomic status
and permit us to understand if social systems flexibly respond to the ecological pressures associated
with island living. Conserving behavioural variation of cultural traditions in capuchins is also
important to inform conservation decisions in Coiba National Park, as culture is an important means
by which organisms adapt to environmental change [129 – 131]. Panama is also an important
biogeographic corridor in the evolution of Cebus, yet there is a dearth of Cebus genetic samples from
rsos.royalsocietypublishing.orgR. Soc. open sci.5: 181002
14
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 28 May 2025 


PDF PAGE 15
areas outside of the canal zone. Comparing genetic samples from Coiba National Park to more samples
across the Panamanian mainland will help clarify whether Pacific capuchins should be considered a
separate species ( C. imitator ) from their Atlantic congeners ( C. capucinus ) [16,45,132].
Ethics. This research was conducted under Ministerio de Ambiente, Panama ´, scientific permit no. SC/A-23-17 and
corresponding renewals and addenda. No animal care and use protocol was required for this study.
Data accessibility. All corresponding data and code for graphing and analysis can be found here: https:/ /github.com/
bjbarrett/CoibaCebusTool1.
Authors’ contributions. B.J.B. conducted fieldwork, participated in the design of the study, analysed the data and drafted
the manuscript. C.M.M.-M conducted fieldwork, participated in design of the study, and helped draft the manuscript.
T.D. provided scans of stone tools and helped draft the manuscript. N.Z. conducted fieldwork and helped draft
the manuscript. A.I. made the initial discovery in the field and helped draft the manuscript. M.C.C. participated in
the design of the study and helped draft the manuscript. All the authors gave their final approval for publication.
Competing interests. The authors declare no competing interests.
Funding. This research was funded by a Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute Short-term Fellowship, a Coss Award
for International Field Research through UC Davis and an L.S.B. Leakey Foundation grant awarded to B.J.B. as well as
funds from the Max Planck Institute. It was also supported by a Packard Foundation Fellowship (2016-65130) and
grant from the National Science Foundation (NSF BCS 1514174) awarded to M.C.C.
Acknowledgements. Thanks to Owen McMillan and the staff at the Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute for support—
particularly STRI’s Rancheria field station; Eliezer Vega, Chris Dillis, Pedro Luis Castillo, Zarluis Miguel Mijango and
Evelyn del Rosario assisted with fieldwork. Thanks to Paul Stewart and Huw Cordey of Silverback films for
correspondence and footage, and to two reviewers who provided useful feedback on this manuscript.
References
1. Marshall AJ, Wrangham RW. 2007 Evolutionary
consequences of fallback foods. Int. J. Primatol.
28, 1219. (doi:10.1007/s10764-007-9218-5)
2. Bentley-Condit VK, Smith E. 2010 Animal tool
use: current definitions and an updated
comprehensive catalog. Behaviour 147,
185 – 32A. (doi:10.1163/
000579509X12512865686555)
3. Shumaker RW, Walkup KR, Beck BB. 2011
Animal tool behavior: the use and manufacture
of tools by animals . Baltimore, MD: JHU Press.
4. Reader SM, Hager Y, Laland KN. 2011 The
evolution of primate general and cultural
intelligence. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 366,
1017 – 1027. (doi:10.1098/rstb.2010.0342)
5. Seed A, Byrne R. 2010 Animal tool-use. Curr.
Biol. 20, R1032 – R1039. (doi:10.1016/j.cub.
2010.09.042)
6. Teschke I, Wascher CAF, Scriba MF, von Bayern
AMP, Huml V, Siemers B, Tebbich S. 2013 Did
tool-use evolve with enhanced physical
cognitive abilities? Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 368,
20120418. (doi:10.1098/rstb.2012.0418)
7. Richerson PJ, Boyd R. 2005 Not by genes alone .
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
8. Kacelnik A. 2009 Tools for thought or thoughts
for tools? Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 106,
10 071–10 072. (doi:10.1073/pnas.0904735106)
9. Laland KN, Odling-Smee J, Myles S. 2010 How
culture shaped the human genome: bringing
genetics and the human sciences together. Nat.
Rev. Genet. 11, 137 – 148. (doi:10.1038/
nrg2734)
10. Panger MA, Brooks AS, Richmond BG, Wood B.
2002 Older than the Oldowan? Rethinking the
emergence of hominin tool use. Evol. Anthropol.
11, 235 – 245. (doi:10.1002/evan.10094)
11. Toth N, Schick K. 2009 The Oldowan: the tool
making of early hominins and chimpanzees
compared. Annu. Rev. Anthropol. 38, 289 – 305.
(doi:10.1146/annurev-anthro-091908-164521)
12. McPherron SP, Alemseged Z, Marean CW, Wynn
JG, Reed D, Geraads D, Bobe R, Be´arat HA. 2010
Evidence for stone-tool-assisted consumption of
animal tissues before 3.39 million years ago at
Dikika, Ethiopia. Nature 466, 857 – 860. (doi:10.
1038/nature09248)
13. Harmand S et al. 2015 3.3-million-year-old
stone tools from Lomekwi 3, West Turkana,
Kenya. Nature 521, 310 – 315. (doi:10.1038/
nature14464)
14. Arroyo A, de la Torre I. 2016 Assessing the
function of pounding tools in the early stone
age: a microscopic approach to the analysis of
percussive artefacts from beds I and II, Olduvai
Gorge (Tanzania). J. Archaeol. Sci. 74, 23 – 34.
(doi:10.1016/j.jas.2016.08.003)
15. Proffitt T, Luncz LV, Falo ´tico T, Ottoni EB, de la
Torre I, Haslam M. 2016 Wild monkeys flake
stone tools. Nature 539, 85 – 88. (doi:10.1038/
nature20112)
16. Lynch Alfaro JWL, Silva JdSE, Rylands AB. 2012
How different are robust and gracile capuchin
monkeys? An argument for the use of Sapajus
and Cebus. Am. J. Primatol. 74, 273 – 286.
(doi:10.1002/ajp.22007)
17. Ottoni EB, Mannu M. 2001 Semifree-ranging
tufted capuchins ( Cebus apella ) spontaneously
use tools to crack open nuts. Int. J. Primatol. 22,
347 – 358. (doi:10.1023/A:1010747426841)
18. Fragaszy D, Izar P, Visalberghi E, Ottoni EB, de
Oliveira MG. 2004 Wild capuchin monkeys
(Cebus libidinosus ) use anvils and stone
pounding tools. Am. J. Primatol. 64, 359 – 366.
(doi:10.1002/ajp.20085)
19. Mendes FDC, Cardoso RM, Ottoni EB, Izar P,
Villar DNA, Marquezan RF. 2015 Diversity of
nutcracking tool sites used by Sapajus
libidinosus in Brazilian Cerrado. Am. J. Primatol.
77, 535 – 546. (doi:10.1002/ajp.22373)
20. Canale GR, Guidorizzi CE, Kierulff MCM, Gatto
CAFR. 2009 First record of tool use by wild
populations of the yellow-breasted capuchin
monkey (Cebus xanthosternos) and new records
for the bearded capuchin ( Cebus libidinosus ).
Am. J. Primatol. 71, 366 – 372. (doi:10.1002/ajp.
20648)
21. Ferreira RG, Jerusalinsky L, Silva TCF, de Souza
Fialho M, de Arau´jo Roque A, Fernandes A,
Arruda F. 2009 On the occurrence of Cebus
flavius (Schreber 1774) in the Caatinga, and the
use of semi-arid environments by Cebus species
in the Brazilian state of Rio Grande do Norte.
Primates 50, 357 – 362. (doi:10.1007/s10329-
009-0156-z)
22. Rocha VJ, Reis N, Sekiama ML. 1998 Uso de
ferramentas por Cebus apella (Linnaeus)
(Primates, Cebidae) para obtenc¸a˜o de larvas
de coleo´ptera que parasitam sementes de
Syagrus romanzoffianum (Cham.) Glassm.
(Arecaceae). Revista Brasileira de Zoologia 15,
945 – 950. (doi:10.1590/S0101-817519980
00400012)
23. Boinski S, Quatrone RP, Swartz H. 2000
Substrate and tool use by brown capuchins in
Suriname: ecological contexts and cognitive
bases. Am. Anthropol. 102, 741 – 761. (doi:10.
1525/aa.2000.102.4.741)
24. Boubli JP, Rylands AB, Farias IP, Alfaro ME,
Lynch Alfaro J. 2012 Cebus phylogenetic
relationships: a preliminary reassessment of the
diversity of the untufted capuchin monkeys.
Am. J. Primatol. 74, 381 – 393. (doi:10.1002/ajp.
21998)
25. Ottoni EB, Izar P. 2008 Capuchin monkey tool
use: overview and implications.
Evol. Anthropol.
17, 171 – 178. (doi:10.1002/evan.20185)
rsos.royalsocietypublishing.orgR. Soc. open sci.5: 181002
15
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 28 May 2025 


PDF PAGE 16
26. Garber PA, Gomes D, Bicca-Marques J. 2012
Experimental field study of problem-solving
using tools in free-ranging capuchins ( Sapajus
nigritus, formerly Cebus nigritus ).
Am. J. Primatol. 74, 344 – 358. (doi:10.1002/
ajp.20957)
27. Mannu M, Ottoni EB. 2009 The enhanced
tool-kit of two groups of wild bearded capuchin
monkeys in the Caatinga: tool making,
associative use, and secondary tools.
Am. J. Primatol. 71, 242 – 251. (doi:10.1002/
ajp.20642)
28. Falo ´tico T, Ottoni EB. 2014 Sexual bias in probe
tool manufacture and use by wild bearded
capuchin monkeys. Behav. Processes 108,
117 – 122. (doi:10.1016/j.beproc.2014.09.036)
29. Fernandes ME. 1991 Tool use and predation of
oysters (Crassostrea rhizophorae) by the tufted
capuchin, Cebus apella appella, in brackish water
mangrove swamp. Primates 32, 529 – 531.
(doi:10.1007/BF02381944)
30. Souto A, Bione CB, Bastos M, Bezerra BM,
Fragaszy D, Schiel N. 2011 Critically endangered
blonde capuchins fish for termites and use new
techniques to accomplish the task. Biol. Lett. 7,
532 – 535. (doi:10.1098/rsbl.2011.0034)
31. Torralvo K, Rabelo RM, Andrade A, Botero-Arias
R. 2017 Tool use by Amazonian capuchin
monkeys during predation on caiman nests in a
high-productivity forest. Primates 58, 279 – 283.
(doi:10.1007/s10329-017-0603-1)
32. Chevalier-Skolnikoff S. 1989 Spontaneous tool
use and sensorimotor intelligence in Cebus
compared with other monkeys and apes. Behav.
Brain Sci. 12, 561 – 588. (doi:10.1017/
S0140525X00057678)
33. Fragaszy DM, Visalberghi E, Fedigan LM. 2004
The complete capuchin: the biology of the genus
Cebus. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press.
34. Oppenheimer JR. 1968 Behavior and ecology of
the white-faced monkey: Cebus capucinus ,o n
Barro Colorado Island, C.Z. Urbana: University
of Illinois.
35. Panger MA, Perry S, Rose L, Gros-Louis J, Vogel
E, Mackinnon KC Baker M. 2002 Cross-site
differences in foraging behavior of white-faced
capuchins ( Cebus capucinus ). Am. J. Phys.
Anthropol. 119, 52 – 66. (doi:10.1002/ajpa.
10103)
36. Perry S. 2009 Conformism in the food
processing techniques of white-faced capuchin
monkeys (Cebus capucinus ). Anim. Cogn. 12,
705 – 716. (doi:10.1007/s10071-009-0230-3)
37. Me ´ndez-Carvajal PG, Valde´s-Dı´az S. 2017 Use of
anvils and other feeding behavior observed in
Cebus imitator, Coiba Island, Panama.
Tecnociencia 19, 5 – 18.
38. Chevalier-Skolnikoff S. 1990 Tool use by wild
Cebus monkeys at Santa Rosa National Park,
Costa Rica. Primates 31, 375 – 383. (doi:10.
1007/BF02381108)
39. Boinski S. 1988 Use of a club by a wild
white-faced capuchin ( Cebus capucinus )t o
attack a venomous snake (Bothrops asper).
Am. J. Primatol. 14, 177 – 179. (doi:10.1002/
ajp.1350140208)
40. Beck BB. 1980 Animal tool behavior . New York,
NY: Garland STPM Pub.
41. Hansell M, Ruxton GD. 2008 Setting tool use
within the context of animal construction
behaviour. Trends Ecol. Evol. 23, 73 – 78.
(doi:10.1016/j.tree.2007.10.006)
42. Perry SE, Barrett BJ, Godoy I. 2017 Older,
sociable capuchins ( Cebus capucinus ) invent
more social behaviors, but younger monkeys
innovate more in other contexts. Proc. Natl
Acad. Sci. USA 114, 7806 – 7813. (doi:10.1073/
pnas.1620739114)
43. Phillips KA. 1998 Tool use in wild capuchin
monkeys (Cebus albifrons trinitatis ).
Am. J. Primatol. 46, 259 – 261. (doi:10.1002/
(SICI)1098-2345(1998)46:3,259::AID-
AJP6.3.0.CO;2-R)
44. Lima MG et al. 2017 Capuchin monkey
biogeography: understanding Sapajus
Pleistocene range expansion and the current
sympatry between Cebus and Sapajus.
J. Biogeogr. 44, 810 – 820. (doi:10.1111/
jbi.12945)
45. Lynch Alfaro JW, Izar P, Ferreira RG. 2014
Capuchin monkey research priorities and urgent
issues. Am. J. Primatol. 76, 705 – 720. (doi:10.
1002/ajp.22269)
46. Perry S et al. 2003 Social conventions in wild
white-faced Capuchin monkeys: evidence for
traditions in a neotropical primate. Curr.
Anthropol. 44, 241 – 268. (doi:10.1086/345825)
47. Chapman CA, Fedigan LM. 1990 Dietary
differences between neighboring Cebus
capucinus groups: local traditions, food
availability or responses to food profitability?
Folia Primatol. 54, 177 – 186. (doi:10.1159/
000156442)
48. O’Malley RC, Fedigan L. 2005 Variability in
food-processing behavior among white-faced
capuchins ( Cebus capucinus ) in Santa Rosa
National Park, Costa Rica. Am. J. Phys.
Anthropol. 128, 63 – 73. (doi:10.1002/ajpa.
20186)
49. Barrett BJ, McElreath RL, Perry SE. 2017 Pay-off-
biased social learning underlies the diffusion of
novel extractive foraging traditions in a wild
primate. Proc. R. Soc. B 284, 20170358. (doi:10.
1098/rspb.2017.0358)
50. Perry S, Ordon ˜ez Jimenez JC. 2006 The effects of
food size, rarity, and processing complexity on
white-faced capuchins’ visual attention to
foraging conspecifics. In Feeding ecology in apes
and other primates (eds G Hohmann, MM
Robbins, C Boesch), vol. 48, pp. 203 – 234.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
51. Fragaszy D, Visalberghi E. 2004 Socially biased
learning in monkeys. Anim. Learn. Behav. 32,
24 – 35. (doi:10.3758/BF03196004)
52. Torigoe T. 1985 Comparison of object
manipulation among 74 species of non-human
primates. Primates 26, 182 – 194. (doi:10.1007/
BF02382017)
53. Costello MB, Fragaszy DM. 1988 Prehension in
Cebus and Saimiri: I. Grip type and hand
preference. Am. J. Primatol. 15, 235 – 245.
(doi:10.1002/ajp.1350150306)
54. Christel MI, Fragaszy D. 2000 Manual function
in Cebus apella : digital mobility, preshaping,
and endurance in repetitive grasping.
Int. J. Primatol. 21, 697 – 719. (doi:10.1023/
A:1005521522418)
55. Sugiyama Y, Koman J. 1979 Tool-using
and-making behavior in wild chimpanzees at
Bossou, Guinea. Primates 20, 513 – 524. (doi:10.
1007/BF02373433)
56. Boesch C, Boesch H. 1990 Tool use and tool
making in wild chimpanzees. Folia Primatol. 54,
86 – 99. (doi:10.1159/000156428)
57. Malaivijitnond S, Lekprayoon C, Tandavanittj N,
Panha S, Cheewatham C, Hamada Y. 2007
Stone-tool usage by Thai long-tailed macaques
(Macaca fascicularis). Am. J. Primatol. 69,
227 – 233. (doi:10.1002/ajp.20342)
58. Gumert MD, Kluck M, Malaivijitnond S. 2009
The physical characteristics and usage patterns
of stone axe and pounding hammers used by
long-tailed macaques in the Andaman Sea
region of Thailand. Am. J. Primatol. 71,
594 – 608. (doi:10.1002/ajp.20694)
59. Fox EA, Sitompul AF, Van Schaik CP. 1999
Intelligent tool use in wild Sumatran
orangutans. In The mentality of gorillas and
orangutans (eds ST Parker, RW Mitchell, HL
Miles), pp. 99 – 116. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
60. Rutz C, Bluff LA, Reed N, Troscianko J, Newton
J, Inger R, Kacelnik A, Bearhop S. 2010 The
ecological significance of tool use in New
Caledonian crows. Science 329, 1523 – 1526.
(doi:10.1126/science.1192053)
61. Sanz CM, Morgan DB. 2013 Ecological and social
correlates of chimpanzee tool use. Phil.
Trans. R. Soc. B 368, 20120416. (doi:10.1098/
rstb.2012.0416)
62. Koops K, McGrew WC, Matsuzawa T. 2013
Ecology of culture: do environmental factors
influence foraging tool use in wild
chimpanzees, Pan troglodytes verus ? Anim.
Behav. 85, 175 – 185. (doi:10.1016/j.anbehav.
2012.10.022)
63. Rutz C, St Clair JJ. 2012 The evolutionary origins
and ecological context of tool use in New
Caledonian crows. Behav. Processes 89,
153 – 165. (doi:10.1016/j.beproc.2011.11.005)
64. Furuichi T, Sanz C, Koops K, Sakamaki T, Ryu H,
Tokuyama N, Morgan D. 2015 Why do wild
bonobos not use tools like chimpanzees do?
Behaviour 152, 425 – 460. (doi:10.1163/
1568539X-00003226)
65. Spagnoletti N, Visalberghi E, Verderane MP,
Ottoni E, Izar P, Fragaszy D. 2012 Stone tool use
in wild bearded capuchin monkeys, Cebus
libidinosus. Is it a strategy to overcome food
scarcity? Anim. Behav. 83, 1285 – 1294. (doi:10.
1016/j.anbehav.2012.03.002)
66. Falo ´tico T, Siqueira JO, Ottoni EB. 2017 Digging
up food: excavation stone tool use by wild
capuchin monkeys. Sci. Rep. 7, 6278. (doi:10.
1038/s41598-017-06541-0)
67. Mayr E. 1961 Cause and effect in biology.
Science 134, 1501 – 1506. (doi:10.1126/science.
134.3489.1501)
68. Laland KN, Sterelny K, Odling-Smee J, Hoppitt
W, Uller T. 2011 Cause and effect in biology
revisited: is Mayr’s proximate-ultimate
dichotomy still useful? Science 334,
1512 – 1516. (doi:10.1126/science.1210879)
69. Moura AdA, Lee P. 2004 Capuchin stone tool
use in Caatinga dry forest. Science 306,
1909 – 1909. (doi:10.1126/science.1102558)
rsos.royalsocietypublishing.orgR. Soc. open sci.5: 181002
16
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 28 May 2025 


PDF PAGE 17
70. Visalberghi E, Fragaszy DM, Izar P, Ottoni EB.
2005 Terrestriality and tool use. Science 308,
951 – 952. (doi:10.1126/science.308.5724.951c)
71. Yamakoshi G. 1998 Dietary responses to fruit
scarcity of wild chimpanzees at Bossou, Guinea:
possible implications for ecological importance
of tool use. Am. J. Phys. Anthropol. 106,
283 – 295. (doi:10.1002/(SICI)1096-
8644(199807)106:3,283::AIDAJPA2.3.0.
CO;2-O)
72. Melin AD, Young HC, Mosdossy KN, Fedigan LM.
2014 Seasonality, extractive foraging and the
evolution of primate sensorimotor intelligence.
J. Hum. Evol. 71, 77 – 86. (doi:10.1016/j.jhevol.
2014.02.009)
73. Emlen JM. 1966 The role of time and energy in
food preference. Am. Nat. 100, 611 – 617.
(doi:10.1086/282455)
74. MacArthur RH, Pianka ER. 1966 On optimal use
of a patchy environment. Am. Nat. 100,
603 – 609. (doi:10.1086/282454)
75. Giraldeau LA, Caraco T. 2000 Social foraging
theory. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
76. Ottoni EB, Resende BDd, Izar P. 2005 Watching
the best nutcrackers: what capuchin monkeys
(Cebus apella ) know about others’ tool-using
skills. Anim. Cogn. 8, 215 – 219. (doi:10.1007/
s10071-004-0245-8)
77. Matthews LJ. 2009 Activity patterns, home
range size, and intergroup encounters in Cebus
albifrons support existing models of capuchin
socioecology. Int. J. Primatol. 30, 709 – 728.
(doi:10.1007/s10764-009-9370-1)
78. Meulman EJ, Sanz CM, Visalberghi E, van Schaik
CP. 2012 The role of terrestriality in promoting
primate technology. Evol. Anthropol. 21,
58 – 68. (doi:10.1002/evan.21304)
79. Defler TR. 1979 On the ecology and behavior of
Cebus albifrons in eastern Colombia: I. Ecology.
Primates 20, 475 – 490. (doi:10.1007/
BF02373430)
80. Monteza-Moreno et al . (in preparation).
81. van Schaik CP, Deaner RO, Merrill MY. 1999 The
conditions for tool use in primates: implications
for the evolution of material culture. J. Hum.
Evol. 36, 719 – 741. (doi:10.1006/jhev.1999.
0304)
82. Iba ´n˜ez A. 2011 Guı´a bota´nica del Parque
nacional Coiba. International Cooperative
Biodiversity Groups: Instituto Smithsonian
de Investigaciones Tropicals: Secretarı´
a
Nacional de C.
83. Castroviejo S (ed.). 1997 Flora y fauna del
Parque nacional de Coiba (Panama´): Inventario
preliminar. Agencia Espan˜ola de Cooperacio´n
Internacional.
84. Milton K, Mittermeier RA. 1977 A brief survey of
the primates of Coiba Island, Panama. Primates
18, 931 – 936. (doi:10.1007/BF02382942)
85. Isaza I, Vrba E. 2010 Ocupacio ´n pre-colombina
de las Islas del Parque Nacional Coiba. Panama:
Informe final del Proyecto PRB08-003 archivos
SENACYT.
86. Iba ´n˜ez C, Pe´rez-Jorda´ J, Juste J, Guille´n A. 1997
Los mamı´feros terrestres del Parque Nacional
Coiba (Panama´). In Flora y fauna del Parque
nacional de Coiba (Panama´): Inventario
preliminar (ed. S Castroviejo), pp. 469 – 486.
Agencia Espan˜ola de Cooperacio´n Internacional.
87. Olson SL. 1997 Avian biogeography in the
islands of the Pacific Coast of western Panama.
In Era of Allan R Phillips: A Festschrift
(ed. RW Dickerman), pp. 69 – 81. Horizon
Communications.
88. Zimmer KJ. 1997 Species limits in Cranioleuca
vulpina.I n Ornithological Monographs No. 48,
Studies in Neotropical Ornithology Honoring Ted
Parker, pp. 849 – 864. Chicago, IL: American
Ornithological Society.
89. Duquette JF, Uren ˜a L, Ortega J, Cisneros I,
Moreno R, Flores EE. 2017 Coiban agouti
(Dasyprocta coibae) density and temporal
activity on Coiba Island, Veraguas, Panama.
Mamm. Study 42, 153 – 160. (doi:10.3106/041.
042.0305)
90. Steinitz C, Faris R, Flaxman M, Karish K,
Mellinger AD, Canfield T, Sucre L. 2005 A
delicate balance: conservation and development
scenarios for Panama’s Coiba National Park.
Environment 47, 24 – 39. (doi:10.3200/ENVT.47.
5.24-43)
91. Gonza ´lez P, Sawyer YE, Avila M, Armie ´n AG,
Armie´n B, Cook JA. 2010 Variation in
cytochrome-b haplotypes suggests a new
species of Zygodontomys (Rodentia: Cricetidae)
endemic to Isla Coiba, Panama. Zoologia
(Curitiba) 27, 660 – 665. (doi:10.1590/S1984-
46702010000400014)
92. Me ´ndez-Carvajal P. 2012 Population study of
Coiba howler monkeys ( Alouatta coibensis
coibensis) and Coiba capuchin monkeys ( Cebus
capucinus imitator), Coiba Island National Park,
Republic of Panama. J. Primatol. 1, 104. (doi:10.
4172/2167-6801.1000104)
93. Perry S, Godoy I, Lammers W. 2012 The Lomas
Barbudal Monkey Project: two decades of
research on Cebus capucinus.I n Long-term field
studies of primates , pp. 141 – 163. Berlin,
Germany: Springer.
94. MacArthur RH, Wilson EO. 1967 Theory of island
biogeography, vol. 1. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
95. Pe ´rez R, Condit R, Aguilar S, Herna ´ndez A,
Villareal A. 1996 Inventario de la vegetacio ´nd e
la isla de Coiba, Panama ´: composicio´ny
florı´stica. Rev. Biol. Trop. 44, 31 – 40.
96. Ibanez et al. (in preparation).
97. Iba ´n˜ez A. 2001 Estudio de la composicio ´n
florı´stica y ecologı´a del bosque tropical de la isla
de Coiba (Panama´). Tesis de Doctorado,
Universidad de Salamanca, Espan˜a.
98. Sanz C, Morgan D, Gulick S. 2004 New insights
into chimpanzees, tools, and termites from the
Congo Basin. Am. Nat. 164, 567 – 581. (doi:10.
1086/424803)
99. Porter ST, Roussel M, Soressi M. 2016
A simple photogrammetry rig for the reliable
creation of 3D artifact models in the field:
lithic examples from the Early Upper
Paleolithic sequence of Les Cotte´s (France). Adv.
Archaeol. Pract. 4, 71 – 86. (doi:10.7183/2326-
3768.4.1.71)
100. McElreath R. 2016 rethinking: statistical
rethinking book package; V. 1.59.
101. R Core Team. 2016 R: a language and
environment for statistical computing . Vienna,
Austria: R Foundation for Statistical Computing.
See https://www.R-project.org/.
102. 2016 RStan: the R interface to Stan. V. 2.14.0.
See http:/ /mc-stan.org/rstan.html.
103. Inizan ML, Reduron-Ballinger M, Roche H. 1999
Technology and terminology of knapped stone:
followed by a multilingual vocabulary Arabic,
English, French, German, Greek, Italian,
Portuguese, Spanish, vol. 5 . Meudon, France:
Cercle de Recherches et d’Etudes Pre ´historiques.
104. Gumert MD, Malaivijitnond S. 2012 Marine prey
processed with stone tools by Burmese long-
tailed macaques ( Macaca fascicularis aurea )i n
intertidal habitats. Am. J. Phys. Anthropol. 149,
447 – 457. (doi:10.1002/ajpa.22143)
105. Tan A, Tan SH, Vyas D, Malaivijitnond S, Gumert
MD. 2015 There is more than one way to crack
an oyster: identifying variation in Burmese
long-tailed macaque ( Macaca fascicularis aurea )
stone-tool use. PLoS ONE 10, e0124733. (doi:10.
1371/journal.pone.0124733)
106. Falo ´tico T, Spagnoletti N, Haslam M, Luncz LV,
Malaivijitnond S, Gumert M. 2017 Analysis of
sea almond ( Terminalia catappa) cracking sites
used by wild Burmese long-tailed macaques
(Macaca fascicularis aurea). Am. J. Primatol. 79,
e22629. (doi:10.1002/ajp.22629)
107. Aguiar LM, Cardoso RM, Back JP, Carneiro EC,
Suzin A, Ottoni EB. 2014 Tool use in urban
populations of capuchin monkeys Sapajus spp.
(Primates: Cebidae). Zoologia (Curitiba) 31,
516 – 519. (doi:10.1590/S1984-
46702014000500012)
108. Moura ACdA, Lee PC. 2010 Wild capuchins show
male-biased feeding tool use. Int. J. Primatol.
31, 457 – 470. (doi:10.1007/s10764-010-9406-
6)
109. Spagnoletti N, Visalberghi E, Ottoni E, Izar P,
Fragaszy D. 2011 Stone tool use by adult wild
bearded capuchin monkeys ( Cebus libidinosus ):
frequency, efficiency and tool selectivity. J. Hum.
Evol. 61, 97 – 107. (doi:10.1016/j.jhevol.2011.
02.010)
110. Boesch C, Boesch H. 1981 Sex differences in the
use of natural hammers by wild chimpanzees: a
preliminary report. J. Hum. Evol. 10, 585 – 593.
(doi:10.1016/S0047-2484(81)80049-8)
111. Gruber T, Clay Z, Zuberbu ¨hler K. 2010 A
comparison of bonobo and chimpanzee tool
use: evidence for a female bias in the Pan
lineage. Anim. Behav. 80, 1023 – 1033. (doi:10.
1016/j.anbehav.2010.09.005)
112. Gumert MD, Kuan HL, Suchinda M. 2011 Sex
differences in the stone tool-use behavior of a
wild population of Burmese long-tailed
macaques ( Macaca fascicularis aurea ).
Am. J. Primatol. 73, 1239 – 1249. (doi:10.1002/
ajp.20996)
113. Melin AD, Fedigan LM, Hiramatsu C, Sendall CL,
Kawamura S. 2007 Effects of colour vision
phenotype on insect capture by a free-ranging
population of white-faced capuchins, Cebus
capucinus. Anim. Behav. 73, 205 – 214. (doi:10.
1016/j.anbehav.2006.07.003)
114. Boinskil S, Fragaszy D, Ehmkel E, Kauffman L.
2007 Wild brown capuchins in Suriname exploit
combinatorial manipulation for multiple
functions. Conference abstract. In American
Journal of Physical Anthropology . Wiley-Liss Div
John Wiley & Sons inc., 111 River St, Hoboken,
NJ 07030 USA, pp. 77 – 77.
rsos.royalsocietypublishing.orgR. Soc. open sci.5: 181002
17
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 28 May 2025 


PDF PAGE 18
115. Tabacow FP, Mendes SL, Strier KB. 2009 Spread
of a terrestrial tradition in an arboreal primate.
Am. Anthropol. 111, 238 – 249. (doi:10.1111/j.
1548-1433.2009.01116.x)
116. Clutton-Brock T, Lukas D. 2012 The evolution of
social philopatry and dispersal in female
mammals. Mol. Ecol. 21, 472 – 492. (doi:10.
1111/j.1365-294X.2011.05232.x)
117. Wang C, Fiedler PC. 2006 ENSO variability and
the eastern tropical Pacific: a review. Prog.
Oceanogr. 69, 239 – 266. (doi:10.1016/j.pocean.
2006.03.004)
118. Soley FG, Chaco ´n IS, Soley-Guardia M. 2017
Extraction of hermit crabs from their shells by
white-faced capuchin monkeys ( Cebus
capucinus). Primates 58, 25 – 29. (doi:10.1007/
s10329-016-0576-5)
119. Campbell JC. 2013 White-faced capuchins
(Cebus capucinus ) of Cahuita National Park,
Costa Rica: human foods and human
interactions. Master’s thesis, Iowa State
University, Ames.
120. Schofield EK. 1989 Effects of introduced plants
and animals on island vegetation: examples
from Gala´pagos Archipelago. Conserv. Biol. 3,
227 – 239. (doi:10.1111/j.1523-1739.1989.
tb00081.x)
121. Bergstrom DM, Chown SL. 1999 Life at the
front: history, ecology and change on Southern
Ocean islands. Trends Ecol. Evol. 14, 472 – 477.
(doi:10.1016/S0169-5347(99)01688-2)
122. Courchamp F, Hoffmann BD, Russell JC, Leclerc
C, Bellard C. 2014 Climate change, sea-level
rise, and conservation: keeping island
biodiversity afloat. Trends Ecol. Evol. 29,
127 – 130. (doi:10.1016/j.tree.2014.01.001)
123. Corte ´s-Ortiz L, Rylands AB, Mittermeier RA.
2015 The taxonomy of howler monkeys:
integrating old and new knowledge from
morphological and genetic studies. In
Howler monkeys: adaptive radiation,
systematics, and morphology (eds MM
Kowalewski, PA Garber, L Corte ´s-Ortiz, B
Urbani, D Youlatos), pp. 55 – 84. Berlin,
Germany: Springer.
124. Ellsworth JA, Hoelzer GA. 2006 Genetic evidence
on the historical biogeography of Central
American howler monkeys. In Primate
biogeography: progress and prospect , (eds SM
Lehman, JG Fleagle), pp. 81 – 103. Berlin,
Germany: Springer.
125. Thomas O. 1902 On some mammals from Coiba
Island, off the west coast of Panama. Novit
Zoologicae 9, 135 – 137.
126. Goldman EA. 1920 Mammals of Panama (with
thirty-nine plates), vol. 69 of Smithsonian
Miscellaneous Collections. The Smithsonian
Institution.
127. Foster JB. 1964 Evolution of mammals on
islands. Nature 202, 234 – 235. (doi:10.1038/
202234a0)
128. Lomolino MV. 1985 Body size of
mammals on islands: the island rule
reexamined.
Am. Nat. 125, 310 – 316. (doi:10.
1086/284343)
129. Ryan S. 2006 The role of culture in conservation
planning for small or endangered populations.
Conserv. Biol. 20, 1321 – 1324. (doi:10.1111/
j.1523-1739.2006.00347.x)
130. Laiolo P, Jovani R. 2007 The emergence of
animal culture conservation. Trends Ecol. Evol.
22, 5. (doi:10.1016/j.tree.2006.10.007)
131. Whitehead H. 2010 Conserving and managing
animals that learn socially and share cultures.
Learn. Behav. 38, 329 – 336. (doi:10.3758/LB.38.
3.329)
132. Ruiz-Garcı ´a M, Castillo MI. 2016 Genetic
structure, spatial patterns and historical
demographic evolution of white-throated
capuchin ( Cebus capucinus , Cebidae, Primates)
populations of Colombia and Central America by
means of DNA microsatellites. In Phylogeny,
molecular population genetics, evolutionary
biology and conservation of the neotropical
primates (eds M Ruiz-Garcı´a, JM Shostell),
pp. 1– 39. New York, NY: Nova Science
Publisher Inc.
rsos.royalsocietypublishing.orgR. Soc. open sci.5: 181002
18
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 28 May 2025 
