PDF PAGE 1
PRIMATES, 18(4): 931-936, October 1977 931 
SHORT COMMUNICATIONS 
A Brief Survey of the Primates of Coiba Island, Panama 
KATHARINE MILTON 
Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute 
and RUSSELL A. MITTERMEIER 
New York Zoological Society 
ABSTRACT. Two species of primates, Alouatta palliata coibensis and Cebus capucinus imi- 
tator, occur on the Pacific island of Coiba, located offthe coast of Panama. Eighteen Alouatta 
groups and 13 Cebus groups were seen during a 12-day survey (26 October-6 November, 
1974). Five Alouatta groups ranged in size from 2-9 animals and averaged 5.2 animals/group; 
one Cebus group contained 10 individuals. Cebus frequently forage on the ground on Coiba, 
and both Alouatta and Cebus occasionally enter mangrove swamp. 
INTRODUCTION 
Coiba is the largest Pacific coast island in close proximity to Central America. It is 
located off southwestern Panama at 7o20 , to 7o40 , N and 81036 , to 81054 ' W and is 
34 km long and 21 km wide. Altitude varies from sea level to approximately 425 m. 
Coiba was once almost entirely covered with forest (WETMORE, 1957). Since 1915, the 
Panamanian government has maintained a penal colony on the eastern coast of the 
island (Fig. 1). As a result, a large portion of the forest on the eastern side of the is- 
land, especially areas near the various penal camps, has been cleared for agriculture 
and pasturage. However, the remainder of the island, including most of the western 
side, has been little disturbed. Several tree species are dominant in certain tracts of 
the Coiba forest. In the area behind the central camp of the penal colony, there are 
large stands of Couratari sp., whereas a large part of the western side is dominated by 
stands of Prioria sp. 
Two species of primate occur on Coiba, Alouatta palliata coibensis THOMAS, 1902, 
and Cebus capucinus imitator THOMAS, 1903. In 1933, C. R. CARPENTER conducted a 
brief study of the Alouatta population on Coiba (CARPENTER, 1934). The main pur- 
pose of his study was to compare the behavior of the Coiba subspecies with that of 
Alouatta palliata aequatorialis of Barro Colorado Island, Panama Canal Zone, and 
he provided little information on the Coiba monkeys other than to say that they were 
very similar in behavior to those on Barro Colorado. No further work has been con- 
ducted on the Coiba primates since the time of CARPENTER'S investigation. The pres- 
ence of Cebus on Coiba has apparently only once been mentioned in the literature 
(MENDEZ, 1970). 
With the help of the Panamanian National Guard, we were able to conduct a 12-day 
survey (26 October--6 November, 1974) of the Coiba primates ,and obtain some data 
on group size, feeding habits, and conservation status. In this paper, we briefly report 
the results of our survey. 


PDF PAGE 2
932 K. MILTON  R. A. MITTERMEIER 
RESULTS 
Alouatta palliata r 
Group size: Six Alouatta groups and one lone male were seen, and 12 additional 
groups were heard howling. Five of the six groups seen were counted. Group size 
ranged from 2-9 animals, with a mean of 5.2. The 26 animals counted included nine 
males, 14 females, and three infants. The male-female sex ratio was 1:1.6 and group 
proportions were 0.35 males, 0.54 females, 0.00 juveniles, and 0.11 infants (Table 1). 
The locations of the 18 groups and the lone male are shown in Figure 1. 
Feeding: The howler group of four individuals was observed feeding on the fruits of a 
fig tree (Ficus maxima, Moraceae). Other potential howler food sources on Coiba in- 
cluded Ficus obtusifolia, Ficus insipida, Ficus tonduzii, Ficus yoponensis, Ficus nymphae- 
folia,, Anarcardium sp. (Anarcardiaceae), Spondias sp. (Anarcardiaceae), Inga sp. 
(Leguminosae), Prioria sp. (Leguminosae), and Mangifera sp. (Anacardiaceae). 
one group of eight howler monkeys was found in an almost pure stand of man- 
groves (Pelliceria rhizophorae). It is almost certain that the animals were feeding on the 
mangrove shoots and/or fruits since there was no other way to explain their presence 
in the mangrove swamp. In order to reach the swamp, they had to descend from the 
hillside forest which apparently constituted their normal range and cross an open 
space of about 75 m by using a singl e Anarcardium tree, the only arboreal pathway to 
the mangroves for several hundred meters. They could not have been using the swamp 
as a corridor to another type of forest, since it extended unbroken to the coast. 
Miscellaneous observations: Two ~ insects commonly associated with howler monkeys 
on Barro Colorado Island, Panama, appeared to be absent on Coiba. Botfly swellings 
from parasitic Diptera (Cuterebra sp.) were not seen on any of the Coiba howlers, and 
dungbeetles were absent:from the howler feces that we located. 
Two female howlers had infant l's that still had their grey natal coats, indicating 
that they had been born in the six:week period prior to our observations (October). On 
Barro Colorado Island, howler births takeplace in all months, but there are more 
from January to June than from July to December (MILTON, unpubl, data). 
Cebu s capucinus imitator 
Group size: Thirteen Cebus groups were seen, but only one was counted accurately. It 
contained 10 animals (two adult males, three females carrying infants and two late 
Table 1. Composition of five Alouatta palliat a groups counted on Coiba Island. 
Group Adult males Adult females Juveniles Infants Total 
A 1 1 0 0 2 
B 1 2 0 0 3 
C 1 2 0 1 (inf. 3) 4 
D 3 4 0 1 (inf. 1) 8 
E 3 5 0 1 (inf. 1) 9 
Total 9 14 0 3 26 
Average 1.8 2.8 0 0.6 5.2 
Proportion 0.35 0.54 0.00 0.11 1.00 


PDF PAGE 3
Survey of Coiba Island Primates 933 
Compomento de duncal-e 
COIBA ISLAND 
El Campamento de Catival\ 
\ La Galera ~e 9 
El Campamento de , 
San Juan / 
de Or 
PACIFIC OCEAN 
o,-~o~PUnta Esquina 
Colony 
Bahia Damas 
T 
Alouatta groups seen 
Alouatta groups heard calling 
Cebus groups seen 
El Campamento de Maria--~--Z~A~ 
o 
I I 004~ 
4 km 
Fig. 1. Map of Coiba Island showing locations where Alouatta and Cebus groups were sight- 
ed. The major camps of the penal colony are also indicated. 
juveniles). Estimates for the other 12 groups ranged from 5-20. The locations of the 
13 Cebus groups are shown in Figure 1. 
Cebus density was particularly high in some parts of the island. On the southern tip, 
we located eight groups along a 7.6 km stretch of trail. 
Feeding: The feeding habits of Coiba Cebus indicate considerable dietary flexibility, 
a feature that has been noted for these monkeys in other areas as well (e.g., OPPEN- 
HEIMER, 1968). Cebus tracks were seen on the beach and our guides reported that the 
animals descend to the beach to feed on crabs. They also reportedly enter mangrove 
swamps to feed on a type of worm living on the mangrove trees and raid cultivated 
areas to eat coconuts, bananas, and manioc. We saw one group eating honey and 
honey comb from the nest of a stingless bee. 
Coiba Cebus frequently feed on or near the ground. Four of the 13 groups seen were 
foraging on the ground when encountered. Four others were between 5-10 m above 
the ground. One of the ground groups was foraging in an open pasture some 35 m 
from the nearest trees and another was searching for food items around a fallen log in 
the forest. Our guides reported that the animals often look for termites, ants, and other 
insects in these areas. When discovered, all the ground groups fled immediately into 
the trees. 
Ten of 13 Cebus groups were seen in either young secondary forest (four 


PDF PAGE 4
934 K. MILTON (~ R. A. MITTERMEIER 
groups), or in ecotone areas between old forest and secondary forest (two groups) or 
secondary forest and open, treeless areas (four groups). These sites were heavily 
festooned with vines, which provided excellent cover for the monkeys and probably 
harbored many invertebrate food sources. Only three of 13 groups were found in more 
mature forest. 
DISCUSSION 
Group Size 
The group sizes of Coiba Cebus fall within the range of Cebus capucinus on Barro 
Colorado Island (ENDERS, 1935 ; OPI'ENrtEIMER, 1968). Group sizes of Coiba Alouatta, 
however, are unusually small for Alouatta palliata. Over the past 40 years, group sizes 
of howlers on Barro Colorado Island have usually averaged between 14.7 and 18.5 
(MITTERMEIER, 1973). Even following the yellow fever-associated population crash in 
the late 1940's, group size averaged 8.0 animals (COLLIAS & SOUTHWICK, 1952). BALD- 
WIN and BALDWIN (1972) reported an average group size of 18.9 animals in a forest in 
Chiriqui, southwestern Panama. The group sizes observed on Coiba are more like 
those of Venezuelan and Trinidad Alouatta seniculus (NEVILLE, 1972) and Argentinian 
Alouatta caraya (KRIEG, 1928 ; POPE, 1968) than other A. palliata. 
The reasons for the small group sizes of Alouatta on Coiba are unclear. They may 
result from hunting pressure selectively directed at females with infants. The high pro- 
portion of males, the low number of infants and the complete absence of juveniles in 
the groups counted (Table 1) support this view. CARPENTER (1934, p. 123) made a 
similar observation: 
"The effects of their being hunted can be readily observed when the sparseness of the howler 
populations and smallness of clans are noted in areas where they are hunted, e.g. near Puerto 
Armuelles, around the camps on Coiba Island, and on the mainland of the Canal Zone." 
Deer (Odocoileus virginianus), agouti (Dasyprocta sp.) and iguana (Iguana iguana) 
are frequently hunted for food on Coiba and hunters on some parts of the island ap- 
parently shoot monkeys for food as well. Mother monkeys are also sometime shot to 
obtain infants to sell as pets on the mainland. However, hunting pressure is by no 
means severe and both Alouatta and Cebus groups are found in close proximity to the 
smaller camps on the island. 
Feeding 
Cebus on Coiba seem to prefer ecotone or second growth areas, perhaps because 
such habitats offer better cover and a greater abundance of invertebrate prey. Al- 
though both Cebus and Alouatta occurred at the edges of the large stands of Prioria 
and Couratari, we did not encounter either species within the stands themselves. 
The monkeys undoubtedly enter the Prioria stands on occasion as two Cebus skulls 
were found in the Prioria forest and Alouatta on Barro Colorado eats the flush leaves 
and immature fruits of this tree (K. M., unpubl.). However, the Prioria probably do 
not offer sufficient diversity to make them a preferred habitat. 
The presence of Alouatta and the reports of Cebus in mangrove swamp are note- 
worthy. Although several species of Old World primates live in mangrove swamps 


PDF PAGE 5
Survey of Coiba Island Primates 935 
(e.g., Nasalis larvatus, KERN, 1964; Cercopithecus mona, Cercocebus torquatus, 
GARTLAN & STRUHSAKER, 1972 ; Macaca fascicularis, Presbytis cristata, SOUTHWICK 
& CADI6AN, 1972), there have only been a handful of reports of New World monkeys 
in this habitat (Alouatta seniculus: OSGOOD, 1912; Cebus albifrons: HERNANDEZ- 
CAMACHO & COOPER, in press; Saimiri sciureus: MITTERMEIER & COIMBRA-FILHO, in 
press). 
The high frequency of Cebus groups foraging on the ground, in second growth 
areas, and even in open pastures indicates that this behaviorally flexible species is 
capable of adapting to man-made alterations in the environment. 
Conservation 
In addition to its primate fauna, the island of Coiba has some of the largest tracts 
of primary forest left in Panama. The stands of Prioria are particularly impressive and 
occupy a large portion of the uninhabited western section of the island. Primates and 
other wildlife (including a rich marine fauna in surrounding waters) are still abundant 
and offer many possibilities for research. Hunting pressure is not heavy and appears 
to be largely restricted to the eastern side of the island. For these reasons, the island of 
Coiba, particularly the western side, seems to be an ideal site for the establishment of 
a Panamanian national park. 
Acknowledgments. We would like to express our sincere appreciation to the Panamanian 
National Guard for making the Coiba survey possible. Special thanks to Coronel ARMANDO 
CONTRERAS for arranging our trip and to Teniente FRANCISCO A. KAPELL for assisting us in 
every possible way during our stay on the island. Thanks also to Dr. PEDRO GALINDO, Direc- 
tor of the Gorgas Memorial Institute, for initially suggesting the Coiba project and encourag- 
ing us to carry it out. 
REFERENCES 
BALDWIN, J. D. & J. I. BALDWIN, 1972. Population density and use of space in howling mon- 
keys (Alouatta villosa) in southwestern Panama. Primates, 13: 371-379. 
CARPENTER, C. R., 1934. A field study of the behavior and social relations of howling mon- 
keys. Comp. Psychol. Monogr., 10: 1-168. 
COLLIAS, N. E. & C. H. SOUTHWICK, 1952. A field study of population density and social or- 
ganization in howling monkeys. Proc. Amer. Phil. Soc., 96: 143-156. 
ENDERS, R. K., 1935. Mammalian life histories from Barro Colorado Island, Panama. Bull. 
Mus. Comp. Zool., Harvard, 78: 385-402. 
GARTLAN, J. S.  T. T. STRUHSAKER, 1972. Polyspecific associations and niche separation of 
rain forest anthropoids in Cameroon, West Africa. J. Zool., Lond., 168 : 221-226. 
HERNANDEZ-CAMACHO, J. & R. W. COOPER, in press. The nonhuman primates of Colombia. 
In: Neotropical Primates: Field Studies and Conservation, R. W. TrlORINGTON, JR. & P. 
G. HELTNE (eds.), Battelle Conference Center, Seattle, Washington. 
KERN, J. A., 1964. Observations on the habits of the proboscis monkey, Nasalis larvatus 
(Wurmb), made in the Brunei Bay area, Borneo. Zoologica, 49:183-192. 
KRIEG, H., 1928. Schwarze Brtillaffen (Alouatta caraya HUMBOLDT). Z. saugetierk, 2: 119-132. 
MENDEZ, E., 1970. Los principales mamiferos silvestres de Panama. Private edition, published 
in Panama. 
MITTERMEIER, R. A., 1973. Group activity and population dynamics of the howler monkey 
on Barro Colorado Island. Primates, 14: 1-19. 
-- & A. F. COIMBRA-FILHO, 1977. Primate conservation in Brazilian Amazonia. In: 


PDF PAGE 6
936 K. MILTON  R. A. MITTERMEIER 
Primate Conservation, PRINCE RAINIER OF MONACO & G. BOURNE (eds.), Academic Press, 
New York, pp. 117-166. 
NV.WLLE, M. K., 1972. The population structure of red howler monkeys (Alouatta seniculus) 
in Trinidad and Venezuela. Folia primat., 17: 56-86. 
OPPENHEIMER, J. R., 1968. Behavior and ecology of the white-faced monkey, Cebus capucinus, 
on Barro Colorado Island, C.Z. Unpubl. doctoral dissertation, Univ. of Illinois. 
OSGOOD, W. H., 1912. Mammals from western Venezuela and eastern Colombia. Publ. Field 
Mus. Nat. Hist., ZooL, 10 (5): 29-66. 
Pope, B. L., 1966. The population characteristics of howler monkeys (Alouatta caraya) in 
northern Argentina. Amer. J. Phys. Anthrop., 24: 351-360. 
SOUTrIWICK, C. H. & F. C. CADIGAN, JR., 1972. Population studies of Malaysian primates. 
Primates, 13: 1-18. 
WETMORE, A., 1957. The birds of Isla Coiba, Panama. Smithson. Misc. Coll., 134: 1-105. 
Received January 29, 1976; Accepted July 3, 1976 
Authors' Addresses: KATI--IARINE MILTON, Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute. P. O. Box 2072, 
Balboa, Canal Zone; RUSSELL A. MITTERMEIER, New York Zoological Society, Bronx Zoo, Bronx, New 
York 10460, and Museum of Comparative Zoology, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts 
02138, U. S. A. 
