PDF PAGE 1
Capuchin Monkey Tool Use: Overview
and Implications
EDUARDO B. OTTONI AND PATRI ´CIA IZAR
Nutcracking capuchins are mentioned in reports dating as far back as the six-
teenth century,1,2 as well as in Brazilian folklore. 3 However , it was barely a decade
ago that primatologists ‘ ‘discovered’ ’ the spontaneous use of stones to crack nuts
in a semi-free ranging group of tufted capuchin monkeys. Since then, we have
found several more capuchin populations in savanna-like environments which
employ this form of tool use. 5–7 The evidence so far only weakly supports geneti-
cally based behavioral differences between populations and does not suggest that
dietary pressures in poor environments are proximate determinants of the likeli-
hood of tool use. Instead, tool use within these capuchin populations seems to be
a behavioral tradition that is socially learned and is primarily associated with more
terrestrial habits. However , differences in the diversity of ‘ ‘tool kits’ ’ between popu-
lations remain to be understood.
Capuchins have long been known
for their ability to crack open hard-
shelled fruit by pounding it against a
hard substrate, 8,9 as well as for their
capabilities for complex object
manipulation in laboratory set-
tings.1,10 The complex manipulation
of objects, though, was considered to
some extent to be an artifact of cap-
tive conditions. The use of objects
such as hammers to open nuts, for
instance, was experimentally induced
in captive capuchins, but not
expected in the wild because New
World monkeys were thought to be
entirely arboreal.
11 However, wild
capuchins can be quite terrestrial at
times; they are able to walk bipedally
and carry objects in their hands. 5,12
While there have been no reports of
tool use by rainforest-dwelling tufted
capuchins, both indirect evidence 13
and anecdotal reports 14 indicate the
use of tools to access encapsulated
food by tufted capuchins living in
other habitats.
More recently, the regular use of
stones for nutcracking, as well as
some other forms of tool use, have
been found among wild capuchin
groups inhabiting savanna-like envi-
ronments in central and northeastern
Brazil.5–7 The ﬁrst systematic obser-
vations of tool use by noncaptive
capuchin monkeys focused on semi-
free groups in urban parks.
15,16 For
the last decade, we have studied the
spontaneous stone-aided cracking of
palm nuts by a group that has been
living for more than 20 years in the
Preservation Area of the Tiete ˆ Eco-
logical Park in Sa˜ o Paulo, SP, Brazil.
The animals are provisioned daily,
but also forage for naturally avail-
able resources like fruit, inverte-
brates, and small vertebrates. 17,18
TOOL USE AND SOCIAL
INFORMATION TRANSFER BY
SEMI-FREE CAPUCHIN MONKEYS
Most mature individuals in the Tieteˆ
group crack nuts, although with vari-
able frequency and efﬁciency. Among
the few individuals who did not crack
nuts, most were females and, more
recently, a pair of immigrant subadult
males that transferred into our study
group. One of these males, after watch-
ing nutcracking episodes for some
months, started to exhibit stone-beating
behaviors without nuts and to scrounge
the leftovers of efﬁcient nutcrackers.
Even with the handicap of being less
tolerated than other individuals, this
newcomer (but so far not the other)
started cracking nuts properly after
two years, about the same time it
takes for juveniles born in nutcracking
groups.
Young infants manipulate objects,
including stones, by beating them
against a substrate. One-year-olds of-
ten attempt to crack nuts. However,
the proper coordination of move-
ments and positioning of nuts,
‘‘hammer’’ stones, and ‘‘anvils’’ (any
hard and level substrate) is not
usually reached until the third year of
life (Fig. 1).
19 From an early age,
though, capuchins are keenly inter-
ested in nutcracking by other individ-
ARTICLES
Eduardo B. Ottoni and Patrı ´cia Izar lead
the Cognitive Ethology Laboratory in the
Institute of Psychology of the University
of Sa˜ o Paulo, Brazil. This laboratory’s
main research lines are concerned with
animal cognition, sociality, and socially
mediated learning. Current projects
include studies on tool use and social
dynamics in semi-free and wild capuchin
monkeys, cognitive processes in psitta-
cine birds, and environmental enrichment
for captive animals.
Laboratory of Cognitive Ethology, Dept.
of Experimental Psychology, Institute of
Psychology, University of Sa˜ o Paulo
Av. Prof. Mello Moraes 1721, Bloco A,
Cidade Universita ´ ria, 05508-030, Sa ˜o
Paulo, SP , Brazil.
E-mail: eduardo.ottoni@gmail.com
Key words: socially biased learning; social infor-
mation transfer; behavioral traditions; primate
cognition
VVC 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
DOI 10.1002/evan.20185
Published online in Wiley InterScience
(www.interscience.wiley.com).
Evolutionary Anthropology 17:171–178 (2008)

PDF PAGE 2
uals. As in chimpanzees, 20 conspeciﬁc
observers are typically younger than
the observed nutcrackers, but the role
of the mothers as models is much less
marked, as capuchin infants and juve-
niles may watch other juveniles or
adult males. The food-related activ-
ities of the dominant males tend to be
quite attractive.21
The conspeciﬁc observers of nut-
cracking events, usually younger and
less proﬁcient, are well tolerated by
the nutcracker. Some scrounging by
the young observer is allowed (Fig.
2). Some of our ﬁndings imply an
active, nonrandom choice of observa-
tional targets. Observers preferen-
tially watch the more skilled nut-
crackers,
22 probably because such
selective attention is likely to
enhance scrounging payoffs, which
in turn facilitates social learning
opportunities. If encapsulated fruit
constitutes a seasonal key resource
that allows the occupation of drier,
savanna-like environments, then tol-
erance of scrounging by immature
individuals that cannot extract fruit
by themselves is a necessity. Any
changes in social dynamics toward
more tolerant societies may thus
have had a high adaptive value, even
before the advent of tool-aided forms
of extractive foraging (Box 1).
We propose that scrounging, as a
proximate motivation, optimizes the
conditions for social learning of nut-
cracking techniques. Earlier laboratory
studies led to the view that scrounging
inhibited or prevented observers from
learning the foraging techniques of
proﬁcient individuals,
23–25 but the op-
posite has been found in more recent
studies with marmosets26 and orangu-
tans.27 These more recent results sug-
gest that correlations between scroung-
ing and learning will vary as a func-
tion of many factors, such as the
nature of the interaction between pro-
ducers and scroungers, the relative
scrounging or producing payoffs, and
the potentially distracting aspects of
the setting. Another important point
a b o u tt h i sh y p o t h e s i si st h a ti td e m o n -
Figure 1. Stone-aided nutcracking. A. Boa Vista. B. Tiete ˆ Ecological Park (photos by T. Falotico). [Color ﬁgure can be viewed in the
online issue, which is available at www.interscience.wiley.com.]
172 Ottoni and Izar ARTICLES
 15206505, 2008, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/evan.20185 by Universitaet Konstanz Kommunikations-, Informations-, Wiley Online Library on [17/08/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


PDF PAGE 3
strates how relatively simple individual
cognitive processes, such as the associ-
ation between different observational
‘‘targets’’ and scrounging payoffs, can
optimize conditions for the propaga-
tion of behavioral traditions.
MAPPING THE REPORTS OF TOOL
USE BY CAPUCHIN MONKEYS
Four species of tufted capuchins
are currently recognized 28: C. apella,
C. nigritus, C. libidinosus ,a n d C. xan-
thosternos. While some forms of com-
plex manipulation in the extraction of
palm pits have been observed among
forest-living C. nigritus,29 as well as in
palm-nut smashing Amazonian Cebus
apella,8,9 there have been no reports
of tool use, as deﬁned by Beck, 30 in
these populations (Fig. 3). There has
been only a single anecdotal observa-
tion of tool use in the wild among the
Central American C. capucinus ,
31 for
which behavioral traditions have been
described in dietary preferences 32 and
social conventions.33 Indirect evidence
of tool use (nutcracking sites) by Cebus
xanthostemos from the Chapada Dia-
mantina (State of Bahia, Brazil) has
been reported.
34 There also is one
report of the use of bait to catch ﬁsh by
a captive of this species.35
Most accounts of tool use by wild
populations involve groups of C. libidi-
nosus, which live in the open habitats
of the Brazilian cerrado and caatinga,
which are dry thornbush, savanna-like
environments. This species is more
terrestrial than are other capuchin
populations. Indirect evidence of the
use of stones in nutcracking by wild
C. libidinosus was ﬁrst reported in the
primatological literature in 1997 for a
population living near Desterro do
Malta (State of Paraı ´ba, Brazil). 13
Direct observations of such behavior
were later registered by Fragaszy and
coworkers5 for a population in the
Fazenda Boa Vista (Gilbue ´s, St at e of
Piauı´). Since then, there has been a
growing number of reports from other
cerrado areas in central Brazil. 36,37
Stone-aided cracking of encapsulated
food has also been observed, along
with other forms of tool use, at
another site about 400 km from
the Fazenda Boa Vista. Groups of
C. libidinosus at the Serra da Capivara
National Park (Sa ˜ o Raimundo Non-
ato, Piauı´) use stones to dig the soil
for tubers and cut wood for insects
and larvae.
6,7 I n d i v i d u a l si nt h i sp o p u -
lation have also been observed to use
sticks as probes to access food or
water in cracks, holes, or insect nests.
The use of these stick tools, like that,
observed among chimpanzees and
captive capuchins,
10 involves some
preparation or modiﬁcation. Stick
tools are not only cut from trees and
resized when necessary, but some are
also trimmed to remove leaves and
side branches. In a few cases, the
thinning of the distal extremity was
registered. This enhanced ‘‘tool kit’’
favors the emergence of more com-
plex behavioral patterns, such as the
combined (sequential) use of stones
and sticks in the exploration of dead
trunks for insects.
7
EXPLANATIONS FOR
GEOGRAPHIC VARIATION
IN TOOL USE
The intensive, plastic, and some-
times complex object manipulation
and the use of hard substrates for
cracking encapsulated fruit, though
not the use of tools ( sensu stricto )30
seem to be ‘‘taxon-speciﬁc’’ behav-
ioral patterns for tufted capuchin
monkeys. In the search for causes of
the dissemination of tool use in for-
aging among some capuchin popula-
tions, explanations based on genetic
and/or ecological determinants shap-
Figure 2. Nutcrackers and scroungers. A. Dominant male and scroungers, Boa Vista, Piauı ´
(photo by T. Falotico). B. Adult male and juvenile male scrounger, Tiete ˆ Ecological Park
(photo by B. D. Resende). [Color ﬁgure can be viewed in the online issue, which is avail-
able at www.interscience.wiley.com.]
ARTICLES Capuchin Monkey Tool Use 173
 15206505, 2008, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/evan.20185 by Universitaet Konstanz Kommunikations-, Informations-, Wiley Online Library on [17/08/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


PDF PAGE 4
ing individual behavior could, in
principle, sufﬁce. However, the avail-
able evidence from laboratory experi-
ments and developmental studies in
semi-free ranging populations sug-
gests otherwise. Food scarcity in
some habitats probably plays an im-
portant role in the exploitation of
encapusulated food by capuchins,
but seems less likely to explain the
presence or absence of tool use in
any given population. Even though
the occurrence of tool use in groups
from savanna-like environments, to-
gether with its apparent absence in
forest populations, has led some
authors to propose a food-scarcity
explanation,
6 other evidence, such as
the absence of tool use in forest
areas during periods of food scar-
city
38,39 point to other proximal
causes. The most intensive use of
tools has been observed among semi-
free groups living with some degree
of provisioning,
4,40 low predation
risk, and high levels of terrestriality.
A strong association between these
factors and both tool use and the fre-
quent use of bipedal postures in the
transport of food and tools (Box 2) is
suggested by our preliminary sur-
veys. This leads us to favor the
degree of terrestriality, instead of
food scarcity, as the strongest predic-
tor of tool use, especially nutcrack-
ing, by capuchin populations.
41,42
Box 1. Encapsulated Food, Scrounging, and the Evolution of Social Tolerance
Searching for general patterns to
explain the distribution of the
occurrence of tool-use traditions
among primates, van Schaik,
Deaner, and Merrill, 61 proposed a
model based on three major fac-
tors: species-speciﬁc predisposi-
tions such as high encephalization
and hand dexterity, the critical reli-
ance on encapsulated food, and a
degree of social tolerance that
allows less-experienced individuals
to watch proﬁcient tool users at
work. As Coussi-Korbel and
Fragaszy 67 pointed out, the closer
an individual is allowed to stay near
a conspeciﬁc, the more likely it is to
be able to observe the other’s
behavior in detail.
This model seems to ﬁt the avail-
able data on tool use by apes quite
well and has proved its predictive
value in the case of tufted capu-
chins. Until recently, there was no
strong evidence of spontaneous tool
use in free-ranging capuchin popula-
tions, but van Schaik, Deaner, and
Merrill61 argued that, even lacking
the insight and efﬁcient observatio-
nal learning capabilities of great
apes, ‘‘ it is theoretically possible ...
that a socially tolerant monkey popu-
lation will be found in which routine
use of feeding tools occurs, espe-
cially if the skills used are close to
naturally occurring operants, and if
opportunities for would-be learners
are abundant .’’
On the other hand, Kummer and
Goodall62 emphasized the greater
opportunity for innovative behavior in
animals less socially constrained,
such as those foraging alone or in
small groups. As Boinski and col-
leagues
63 pointed out, this is the
case for the less-tolerated young
adult male tufted capuchins, so their
society may represent a ‘‘propitious
balance’’ between these factors
facilitating both innovation and social
transmission.
We believe that this model, in
which social dynamics join individ-
ual genetically determined cognitive
and motor capabilities on one hand
and ecologically determined pres-
sures and affordances on the other,
is a truly insightful one. However,
we propose a ‘‘positive feedback
loop’’ in the relationship between
extractive foraging and social toler-
ance. All available evidence sug-
gests that reliance on encapsulated
food is a common feature in all
tufted capuchin populations and
therefore precedes the use of tools,
although these may greatly reduce
the costs of accessing this kind of
food and broaden the range of ac-
cessible items. While it is generally
accepted that capuchin abilities for
extractive foraging enable them to
occupy a much wider range of hab-
itats than does the average New
World monkey, some developmental
constraints are usually overlooked.
If encapsulated fruit constitutes a
critical resource for the survival of a
given population, and if food selec-
tion and processing techniques take
some time to be learned, with or
without any socially mediated short-
cuts to individual trial-and-error
learning, there must be a ‘‘contin-
gency strategy’’ whereby weaned
infants can survive until they can for-
age autonomously (assuming that
access to these encapsulated foods
is critical for immature individuals).
Even if extractive techniques were
completely innate and not depend-
ent on any kind of learning process,
there would be a mechanical issue
because infants lack the necessary
strength, with or without the aid of
tools, to open hard-shelled nuts or
similar items. Therefore, adaptations
for extractive foraging depend on
some associated social features
favoring food sharing with young-
sters, minimally in the form of toler-
ated scrounging. T olerance for
scrounging could, therefore, set the
stage for the subsequent establish-
ment of tool-use traditions in a sort
of ‘ ‘positive feedback.’’
This hypothetical scenario bears
some resemblance to one of the
possible causes of cognitive evolu-
tion in the human lineage proposed
by van Schaik and Pradhan
64:A n
increase in sociability during foraging
(communal hunting or scavenging)
would, per se , increase the probabil-
ity of the social diffusion of the use
of tools independently of any imme-
diate changes in cognitive capaci-
ties. The subsequent acquisition of
more complex skills, however, would
raise the selection pressures favoring
the evolution of more complex cog-
nitive abilities.
174 Ottoni and Izar ARTICLES
 15206505, 2008, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/evan.20185 by Universitaet Konstanz Kommunikations-, Informations-, Wiley Online Library on [17/08/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


PDF PAGE 5
The current data on tool use by
wild groups of tufted capuchins
clearly documents C. libidinosus and,
perhaps, C. xanthostemos as regular
tool users, indicating that genetic dif-
ferences could account for the
observed geographic variation. How-
ever, we believe that the associated
environmental differences can better
account for these differences. The
hybridization frequently encountered
in the semi-free study groups is
apparently not correlated with any
noticeable individual differences in
the rates or performance of tool use.
Furthermore, no behavioral differen-
ces have ever been reported from
captive or wild groups that could be
traced to intrinsic characteristics
of the different species of tufted
capuchin.
The cracking of encapsulated food
with the use of stones is clearly the
most widely occurring form of tool
use, being present in the ‘‘tool kit’’ of
all known tool-using capuchin
groups. On the other hand, the cus-
tomary use of sticks as probes in nat-
ural settings has so far been docu-
mented only among the Serra da
Capivara groups. Of course reports
based on indirect evidence could
generate a bias toward stone-aided
nutcracking, since probing sticks do
not usually leave such evidence.
The apparent differences in the
‘‘tool kits’’ and techniques of the two
wild populations of C. libidinosus
currently under study (Fazenda Boa
Vista and Serra da Capivara) are a
major point to be investigated. There
are many environmental dissimilar-
ities, especially concerning the avail-
ability of potential ‘‘hammers,’’ but
they can hardly account for all the
observed variation, there are prelimi-
nary reports of possibly relevant dif-
ferences in techniques between
groups in the Serra da Capivara.
7
BEHAVIORAL VARIATION
AND TRADITIONS IN
NONHUMAN ANIMALS
The existence of behavioral tradi-
tions in animals has been proposed
in domains like social dynamics and
structure,43,44 communicative behav-
iors,33,45–47 foraging techniques, and
dietary preferences. 32,45,48,49 But the
permanence of a particular behav-
ioral pattern in the repertoire of an
animal group is always the product
of interplay between genetic and
environmental (social and nonsocial)
factors. To uphold explanations fo-
cusing on the role of social informa-
tion transfer in behavioral intergroup
differences and intragroup similar-
ities, comparative studies have tried
to rule out obvious genetic factors
(‘‘innate’’ differences between subspe-
cies or populations) as well as partic-
ular environmental pressures and
affordances50 as potentially sufﬁcient
causes.
The reviews by Whiten and co-
workers45 and van Schaik and col-
leagues46 on behavioral variation
among wild chimpanzees and orang-
utans, respectively, made it possible
to look at capuchin tool use with a
new perspective. Behavioral patterns
Figure 3. Distribution map of reports on spontaneous tool use by wild and semi-free tufted
capuchin monkeys. l: Negative reports on tool use by wild populations under long-term
studies (though with anecdotal evidence of complex object manipulation in foraging
contexts). A: Caratinga Biol. Station, MG, Brazil; 68 B: Carlos Botelho State Park, SP, Brazil; 38
C: Iguazu´ Nat. Park, Argentina; 69 D: El Rey Nat. Park, Argentina; 70 E: Cocha Cashu Biol.
Station, Peru; 71 F: Urucu River, AM, Brazil; 72 G: La Macarena, Colombia; 8,9 H: BDFF Project,
AM, Brazil; 73 I: Raleighvallen, Suriname; 74 J: Station des Nouragues, French Guiana. 75 ~:
Wild groups with only indirect evidence (cracking sites) or anecdotal observations of
tool-aided cracking of encapsulated food. K: Canelatiua, MA, Brazil; 14 L: Alto Paraı´so,
GO, Brazil; 37 M: Serra da Mesa, GO, Brazil; 76 N: Desterro do Malta, Paraı ´ba, Brazil; 13 O:
Martins, Rio Grande do Norte, Brazil; 77 P: Belo Monte, Alagoas, Brazil; 34 Q: Varzelaˆndia/
Montes Claros, Minas Gerais, Brazil; 34 R: Itiu´ ba/Ibotirama/Contendas do Sincora´ , Bahia,
Brazil;34 S: Terra Ronca Nat. Park, GO, Brazil; 36 T: Minac¸ u, GO, Brazil; 36 U: Mara Rosa, GO,
Brazil;36 V: Peixe, TO, Brazil. 36 n: Wild or semifree populations with customary use of stone
tools in nutcracking. Small squares - semifree groups in urban parks. a: Tiete ˆ Ecol. Park,
Sa˜o Paulo, SP, Brazil; 4 b: Jaragua´ State Park, Sa˜o Paulo, SP, Brazil; 40 c: Arthur Thomas
Mun. Park, Londrina, PR, Brazil; 16 d: Agua Mineral Park, Brasilia DF, Brazil. 78 Big squares -
wild groups. W: Bao Vista, PI, Brazil 5 and X: Brasilia Nat. Park, Brazil. 79 $: Wild groups using
stone tools (for cracking fruit, digging and cutting), and stick probes (sometimes com-
bined). Y: Serra da Capivara, Pl, Brazil. 6,7 Dark area: general distribution of tufted capu-
chins. A-D: Cebus nigritus ; E-K: C. apella ; L-P, S-Y: C. libidinosus ; Q-R: C. xanthosternos ;
a-d: hybrid or uncertain (urban parks).’’ [Color ﬁgure can be viewed in the online issue,
which is available at www.interscience.wiley.com.]
ARTICLES Capuchin Monkey Tool Use 175
 15206505, 2008, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/evan.20185 by Universitaet Konstanz Kommunikations-, Informations-, Wiley Online Library on [17/08/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


PDF PAGE 6
not easily reduced to genetic or eco-
logical determinants were found in
tool use, food preferences, communi-
cative gestures, bodily care techni-
ques, and the possible use of medici-
nal plants. It has been pointed
out51,52 that this ‘‘ethnographic’’
approach cannot prove or disprove
that any given behavior constitutes a
tradition, not only for being prone to
false negatives and false positives, 53
but mainly because it does not take
into account the role of social inﬂu-
ences on individual acquisition of
the behavior in question. These
social inﬂuences, though, are usually
difﬁcult to measure in the ﬁeld. Here
lies the importance of the controlled
conditions provided by the labora-
tory or the near-optimal observatio-
nal conditions in studies of semi-free
ranging groups.
The overall spatio-temporal pat-
terns revealed by comparative stud-
ies can be useful in many ways.
54
First, they show us which behaviors
are species-typical and which are
rare or unique to particular popula-
tions. This information can guide
investigative strategies. Second, these
patterns can help to identify correla-
tions between behavioral traits and
prominent genetic or ecological fac-
tors such as subspecies’ distributions
or very different environments.
Sometimes they can also help in the
detection of tell-tale clues of socially
inﬂuenced behaviors, such as behav-
ioral discontinuites associated with
geographical barriers to intergroup
diffusion.
45,46 Moreover, when there
is already evidence from develop-
mental studies of social inﬂuences
on learning, as is the case with tool-
aided nutcracking by capuchin mon-
keys, mapping the occurrence of
such behaviors across populations
can help us to formulate and test
hypotheses about the origins and dif-
fusion histories of particular behav-
ioral patterns.
Box 2: Bipedalism and the Transport of Tools
Jalles-Filho and collaborators 65
questioned the usefulness of capu-
chins as models for early human
tool use based on experiments in
which captive subjects failed to
transport stone tools. However,
more recent studies have shown
that under some experimental cir-
cumstances captive capuchins will
transport tools.
66 Caged animals
can use cement ﬂoors as ‘‘anvils,’ ’
so cracking sites can be found any-
where. The wide availability of
cracking sites in captivity makes it
easier and safer to carry the nuts to
the ‘ ‘hammers.’’ In natural settings,
hard, ﬂat anvils are usually immov-
able and less abundant, so the
hammers have to be transported at
least once. In our own experimental
interventions in spontaneous nut-
cracking by the semi-free Tiete ˆ
group,
12 the monkeys readily
searched for hammer stones and
bipedally carried them (Fig. B1) to
the anvils when needed, frequently
carrying the nuts simultaneously.
The pattern seems to be the same
in the wild. In Serra da Capivara,
potential hammer stones such as
quartz pebbles are abundant, but in
Boa Vista,
5,42 they have to be
transported for some distance
when new cracking sites are estab-
lished. Stick probes in Serra da
Capivara7 are always carried to
their places of use.
Whether or not capuchins can be
useful models for the early stages
of human technological develop-
ment depends on the particular
questions being examined. Never-
theless, the apparent relationships
among the occupation of open, sa-
vanna-like environments by a
socially tolerant, highly encephal-
ized monkey, the evolution of ana-
tomical adaptations for bipedalism,
and the advent of tool use should
certainly catch the attention of
anthropologists concerned with
early hominin tool use and cognitive
capacities.
Figure B1. Bipedalism and transport of stone tools (Tiete ˆ Ecological Park). A,B. Juvenile
males; C. Adult male (A, photo by B. D. Resende; B, C, photos by T. Falotico). [Color ﬁgure
can be viewed in the online issue, which is available at www.interscience.wiley.com.]
176 Ottoni and Izar ARTICLES
 15206505, 2008, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/evan.20185 by Universitaet Konstanz Kommunikations-, Informations-, Wiley Online Library on [17/08/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


PDF PAGE 7
IMPLICATIONS FOR
UNDERSTANDING THE EVOLUTION
OF HOMININ TOOL USE
Although fascinating in and of
itself, the research on tool use by
tufted capuchins can also provide
useful insights to researchers con-
cerned with human evolution. Pale-
oanthropologists attempt to model
early hominin behavior by means of
a phylogenetic approach, using the
great apes, especially chimpanzees,
as a paradigm, or by using the prin-
ciples of primate socioecology that
relate diet, food distribution, and
features of social systems.
55 Paleo-
climatic and paleobiological data
help to reconstruct the features of
hominin habitat, including the
likely distribution of plant and ani-
mal species that could have been
part of their diet.
56 Diet can be
inferred by comparing certain ana-
tomical features, particularly teeth,
with those of extant primates with
known diets.
These lines of evidence have indi-
cated that early australopith diets
included soft fruit as a preferred
food, complemented with nuts,
seeds, and underground storage
organs.
57 There is also evidence that
these food items could have been
extracted with the use of stone
tools.58 Recently, Laden and Wrang-
ham59 suggested that ‘‘the patterning
in the early hominid fossil record,
such as the existence of gracile and ro-
bust australopiths, may be understood
in reference to an adaptive shift in the
use of underground storage organs .’’ 59
However, the social consequences
associated with such a shift are
unknown. The strong reliance on
roots and tubers extracted with dig-
ging stones by the tufted capuchin
monkeys of Serra da Capivara offers
a unique opportunity to address this
issue. Moreover, studies comparing
tool-use and the absence of tool use
in populations of tufted capuchin
monkeys may provide insight into
the impact of the use of foraging-
associated tools on primate social-
ity.
60 Indeed, the emergence of stone
tool use by these highly encephalized
monkeys in the occupation of sa-
vanna-like environments, as well as
the associated bipedal transport of
tools and food, suggest that capu-
chins may offer a new perspective on
the roles of phylogeny, ecology, for-
aging strategies, terrestriality, and
tolerance in the evolution of technol-
ogy, cognition, and sociality in the
human lineage.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors’ research is supported
by FAPESP, CNPq, and CAPES
grants. The Etho Cebus project
(Fazenda Boa Vista) is funded by
The Leakey Foundation and the
National Geographic Society. We
thank Dorothy Fragaszy, Carel van
Schaik, the editor, and one anony-
mous referee for their helpful com-
ments on an earlier version of this
manuscript.
REFERENCES
1 Visalberghi E. 1990. Tool use in Cebus. Folia
Primatol 54:146–154.
2 Urbani B. 1998. An early report on tool use
by neotropical primates. Neotrop Primates
6:123–124.
3 Andrade M. 1928. Macunaı ´ma. Sa˜ o Paulo:
Eugeˆnio Cupolo.
4 Ottoni EB, Mannu M. 2001. Semifree-ranging
tufted capuchin monkeys ( Cebus apella ) sponta-
neously use tools to crack open nuts. Int J Pri-
matol 22:347–358.
5 Fragaszy D, Izar P, Visalberghi E, Ottoni EB,
Oliveira M. 2004. Wild capuchin monkeys use
anvils and stone pounding tools. Am J Primatol
64:359–366.
6 Moura ACA, Lee P. 2005. Capuchin stone tool
use in Caatinga dry forest. Science 306:1909.
7 Mannu M, Ottoni EB. n.d. The enhanced tool-
kit of two groups of wild bearded capuchin
monkeys in the Caatinga: tool making, associa-
tive use, and secondary tools. Submitted.
8 Izawa K, Mizuno A. 1977. Palm-fruit cracking
behavior of wild black-capped capuchin ( Cebus
apella). Primates 18:773–792.
9 Struhsaker TT, Leland L. 1977. Palm-nut
smashing by Cebus a. apella in Coloˆ mbia. Bio-
tropica 9:124–126.
10 Westergaard GC, Fragaszy DM. 1987. The
manufacture and use of tools by capuchin mon-
keys ( Cebus apella ). J Comp Psychol 101:159–
168.
11 Anderson JR. 1990. Use of objects as ham-
mers to open nuts by capuchin monkeys ( Cebus
apella). Folia Primatol 54:138–145.
12 Falo´ tico T. 2006. Estudo experimental do
uso de ferramentas para quebra de frutos
encapsulados por macacos-prego ( Cebus apella )
em semi-liberdade. Unpublished Master’s dis-
sertation, Institute of Psychology, University of
Sa˜ o Paulo, Brazil.
13 Langguth A, Alonso C. 1997. Capuchin mon-
keys in the Caatinga: tool use and food habits
during drought. Neotrop Primates 5:77–78.
14 Fernandes MEB. 1991. Tool use and preda-
tion of oysters ( Crassostrea rhizophorae )b yt h e
tufted capuchin, Cebus apella apella, in brack-
ish water mangrove swamp. Primates 32:529–
531.
15 Mannu M, Ottoni EB. 1996. Observac ¸o˜e s
preliminares das te ´cnicas de forrageamento e
uso espontaˆ neo de ferramentas por um grupo
de macacos-prego ( Cebus apella, primates -
cebidae), em condic ¸o˜ es de semi-cativeiro. An
Etol 14:384.
16 Rocha VJ, Reis NR, Sekiama ML. 1998. Uso
de ferramentas por Cebus apella (Linnaeus)(Pri-
mates, Cebidae) para a obtenc ¸a˜ o de larvas de
Coleoptera que parasitam de sementes de Syag-
rus romanzofﬁanum (Cam.) Glassm. (Areca-
ceae). Rev Bras Zool 15:945–950.
17 Resende BD, Greco VLG, Ottoni EB, Izar P.
2003. Some observations on the predation of
small mammals by tufted capuchin monkeys
(Cebus apella ). Neotrop Primates 11:103–104.
18 Ferreira R, Resende BD, Mannu M, Ottoni
EB, Izar P. 2002. Bird predation and prey-
transfer in brown capuchin monkeys ( Cebus
apella). Neotrop Primates 10:84–89.
19 Resende BD, Ottoni EB, Fragaszy DM. 2008.
Ontogeny of manipulative behavior and nut-
cracking in young tufted capuchin monkeys
(Cebus apella ): a perception-action perspective.
Dev Sci 11:812–824.
20 Biro D, Inoue-Nakamura N, Tonooka R,
Yamakoshi G, Sousa C, Matsuzawa T. 2003.
Cultural innovation and transmission of tool
use in wild chimpanzees: evidence from ﬁeld
experiments. Anim Cogn 6:213–223.
21 Sestini AE, Ottoni EB. 1999. Estrutura
social, manipulac ¸a˜ o de objetos e processos
atencionais no infante em macacos-prego
(Cebus apella ). An Etol 17:117.
22 Ottoni EB, Resende BD, Izar P. 2005.
Watching the best nutcrackers: what capuchin
monkeys ( Cebus apella ) know about others’ tool
using skills. Anim Cogn 8:215–219.
23 Giraldeau LA, Lefebrve L. 1987. Scrounging
prevents cultural transmission of food-ﬁnding
behaviour in pigeons. Anim Behav 35:387–394.
24 Fragaszy D, Visalberghi E. 1984. Social
inﬂuences on the acquisition of tool-using
behaviors in tufted capuchin monkeys ( Cebus
apella). J Comp Psychol 103:159–170.
25 Beauchamp G, Kacelnik A. 1991. Effects of
the knowledge of partners on learning rates in
zebra ﬁnches Taeniopygia guttata . Anim Behav
41:247–253.
26 Caldwell CA, Whiten A. 2002. Scrounging
facilitates social learning in common marmosets
Callithrix jacchus. Anim Behav 65:1085–1082.
27 Russon AE. 2003. Developmental perspec-
tives on great ape traditions. In Fragaszy DM,
Perry S, editors. The biology of traditions: mod-
els and evidence. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, p 329–364.
28 Fragaszy DM, Visalberghi E, Fedigan LM.
2004. The complete capuchin: the biology of
the genus Cebus. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
29 Taira JT, Verderane MP, Ottoni EB, Izar P.
2002. Explorac¸a˜ o das palmeiras Euterpe edulis e
Archontophoenix cunninghamiana por duas
populac¸o˜ es de macacos-prego ( Cebus apella ).
An Etol 20:326.
30 Beck BB. 1980. Animal tool behavior: the
use and manufacture of tools by animals. New
York: Garland Press.
31 Boinski S. 1988. Use of a club by a wild
white-faced capuchin ( Cebus capucinus )t o
attack a venomous snake ( Bothrops asper ). Am
J Primatol 14:177–179.
32 Panger M, Perry S, Rose L, Gros-Louis J,
Vogel E, Mackinnon KC, Baker M. 2002. Cross-
ARTICLES Capuchin Monkey Tool Use 177
 15206505, 2008, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/evan.20185 by Universitaet Konstanz Kommunikations-, Informations-, Wiley Online Library on [17/08/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


PDF PAGE 8
site differences in foraging behavior of white-
faced capuchins ( Cebus capucinus ). Am J Phys
Anthropol 119:52–66.
33 Perry S, Baker M, Fedigan L, Gros-Louis J, Jack
K, MacKinnon K, Manson J, Panger M, Pyle K,
Rose L. 2003. Social conventions in wild white-
faced capuchin monkeys: evidence for traditions in
a neotropical primate. Curr Anthropol 44:241–268.
34 Guidorizzi CE, Canale GR, Kierulff MCM,
Gatto C. n.d. Stones used as tools by wild popu-
lations of two species of capuchin monkey
(Cebus xanthosternos and C. libidinosus )i n
Northeast Brazil. Submitted.
35 Alves ML. Unpublished data.
36 Mendes FD, Ottoni EB, Izar P, Cardoso R, Vil-
lar D, Marchezan R. Manuscript in preparation.
37 Galva˜ o O. Personal communication.
38 Izar P. 2004. Female social relationships of
Cebus apella nigritus in Southeastern Atlantic
Forest: an analysis through ecological models of
primate social evolution. Behaviour 141:71–99.
39 Rimoli J. Personal communication.
40 Silva EDR, Resende BD, Ottoni EB. 2005.
Te´cn ic as de ma ni pu la c¸a˜ o de alimentos utilizadas
pelo grupo livre de macacos-prego ( Cebus apella)
do Parque Estadual do Jaragua ´ : um estudo pre-
liminar. Res Cong Bras Primatol 11:164.
41 Visalberghi E, Fragaszy DM, Izar P, Ottoni EB.
2005. Terrestriality and tool use. Science 308:951.
42 Visalberghi E, Fragaszy D, Ottoni EB, Izar
P, Oliveira MG, Andrade FRD. 2007. Character-
istics of hammer stones and anvils used by wild
bearded capuchin monkeys ( Cebus libidinosus )
to crack open palm nuts. Am J Phys Anthropol
132:426–444.
43 de Waal FBM, Johanowicz D. 1993. Modiﬁ-
cation of reconciliation behavior through social
experience: an experiment with two macaque
species. Child Dev 64:897–908.
44 Sapolsky RM, Share LJ. 2004. A paciﬁc cul-
ture among wild baboons: its emergence and
transmission. PLoS Biol 2:534–541.
45 Whiten A, Goodall J, McGrew WC, Nishida
T, Reynolds V, Sugiyama Y, Tutin CEG, Wrang-
ham RW, Boesch C. 1999. Cultures in chimpan-
zees. Nature 399:682–685.
46 van Schaik CP, Ancrenaz M, Borgen G, Galdi-
kas B, Knott CD, Singleton I, Suzuki A, Utami SS,
Merril M. 2003. Orangutan cultures and the evolu-
tion of material culture. Science 299:102–105.
47 Rendell L, Whitehead H. 2001. Culture in
whales and dolphins. Behav Brain Sci 24:309–382.
48 McGrew WC. 1992. Chimpanzee material cul-
ture. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
49 van Schaik CP, Fox EA, Sitompul AF. 1996.
Manufacture and use of tools in wild Sumatran
orangutans: implications for human evolution.
Naturwiss 83:186–188.
50 Galef BG. 1976. Social transmission of
acquired behavior: a discussion of tradition and
social learning in vertebrates. Adv Stud Behav
6:77–100.
51 Fragaszy D. 2003. Making space for tradi-
tions. Evol Anthropol 12:61–70.
52 Fragaszy DM, Perry S. 2003. Towards a biol-
ogy of traditions. In: Fragaszy DM, Perry S, edi-
tors. The biology of traditions: models and evi-
dence. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
p 1–32.
53 Humle T, Matsuzawa T. 2002. Ant-dipping
among the chimpanzees of Bossou, Guinea,
and some comparisons with other sites. Am J
Primatol 58:133–148.
54 van Schaik CP. 2003. Local traditions in
orangutans and chimpanzees: social learning
and social tolerance. In: Fragaszy DM, Perry S,
editors. The biology of traditions: models and
evidence. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press. p 297–328.
55 Stanford CB. 1999. The hunting apes: meat
eating and the origins of human behavior.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
56 Gollop P, Foley RA. 2001. Evolutionary ge-
ography, habitat availability and species distri-
butions among early African hominids. In: Har-
court C, editor. Monkey, apes and humans: an
evolutionary perspective. London: Westview
Press. p 40–58.
57 Ungar PS. 2004. Dental topography and
diets of Australopithecus afarensis and early
Homo. J Hum Evol 46:605–622.
58 Alba DM, Moya ` -Sola`S , K o ¨ hler M. 2003.
Morphological afﬁnities of the Australopithecus
afarensis hand on the basis of manual propor-
tions and relative thumb length. J Hum Evol
44:225–254.
59 Laden G, Wrangham R. 2005. The rise of
the hominids as an adaptive shift in fallback
foods: plant underground storage organs
(USOs) and australopith origins. J Hum Evol
49:482–498.
60 Izar P, Fragaszy DM, Visalberghi E, Ottoni
EB. n.d. Society and technology: expanding
sociecological models of primate social systems
to include tool use. In preparation.
61 van Schaik CP, Deaner RO, Merrill MY.
1999. The conditions for tool use in primates:
implications for the evolution of material cul-
ture. J Hum Evol 36:719–741.62
62 Kummer H, Goodall J. 1985. Conditions of
innovative behaviour in primates. Philos Trans
R Soc London, Series B, Biological Sciences
308:203–214.
63 Boinski S, Quatrone RP, Sughrue K, Selvaggi
L, Henry M, Stickler CM, Rose LM. 2003. Do
brown capuchins socially learn foraging skills?
In: Fragaszy DM, Perry S, editors. The biology of
traditions: models and evidence. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press. p 365–390.
64 van Schaik CP, Pradhan GR. 2003. A model
for tool-use traditions in primates: implications
for the coevolution of culture and cognition.
J Human Evol 44:645–664.
65 Jalles-Filho E, Grassetto R, da Cunha T,
Salm RA. 2001. Transport of tools and men-
tal representation: is capuchin monkey tool
behaviour a useful model of Plio-Pleistocene
hominid technology? J Hum Evol 40:365–
377.
66 Cleveland A, Rocca AM, Wendt EL, Wester-
gaard GC. 2004. Transport of tools to food sites
in tufted capuchin monkeys ( Cebus apella ).
Anim Cogn 7:193–198.
67 Coussi-Korbel S, Fragaszy DM. 1995. On the
relation between social dynamics and social
learning. Anim Behav 50:1441–1553.
68 Rı´moli J. 2001. Ecologia de macacos-prego
(Cebus apella nigritus, Goldfuss, 1809) na Esta-
c¸a˜ o Biolo´ gica de Caratinga (MG): implicac ¸o˜e s
para a conservac ¸a˜ o de fragmentos de Mata
Atlaˆ ntica. Unpublished doctoral thesis. Federal
University of Para´.
69 Di Bitetti MS. 2001. Home-range use by the
tufted capuchin monkey ( Cebus apella nigritus )
in a subtropical rainforest of Argentina. J Zool
Lond 253:33–45.
70 Brown AD, Zunino GE. 1990. Dietary vari-
ability in Cebus apella in extreme habitats: evi-
dence for adaptability. Folia Primatol 54:187–
195.
71 Terborgh J. 1983. Five New World monkeys.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
72 Peres CA. 1994. Primate responses to pheno-
logical changes in an Amazonian terra ﬁrme
forest. Biotropica 26:98–112.
73 Spironello WR. 2001. The brown capuchin
monkey ( Cebus apella ). Ecology and home
range requirements in Central Amazonia. In:
Bierregaard RO, Gascon C Jr, Lovejoy TE, Mes-
quita R, editors. Lessons from Amazonia: the
ecology and conservation of a fragmented for-
est. New Haven: Yale University Press. p 271–
283.
74 Boinski S. Personal communication.
75 Zhang S. 1995. Activity and ranging patterns
in relation to fruit utilization by brown capu-
chin monkeys ( Cebus apella ). Int J Primatol
16:489–507.
76 Souza CA, Mendes FDC, Silva JN Jr. 2002.
Utilizac¸a˜ o de ferramentas por Cebus apella
libidinosus de dispersa˜ o livre. An X Cong Bras
Primatol:89.
77 Ferreira RG. Personal communication.
78 Visalberghi E. Personal communication.
79 Waga IC, Dacier AK, Pinga PS, Tavares
MCH. 2006. Spontaneous tool use by wild capu-
chin monkeys ( Cebus libidinosus ) in the cer-
rado. Folia Primatol 77:337–344.
VVC 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
178 Ottoni and Izar ARTICLES
 15206505, 2008, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/evan.20185 by Universitaet Konstanz Kommunikations-, Informations-, Wiley Online Library on [17/08/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
