PDF PAGE 1
Bearded capuchin monkeys’ and a human’s efﬁciency at cracking palm nuts
with stone tools: ﬁeld experiments
D. Fragaszy a, *, T. Pickering a, Q. Liu a, P. Izar b,1, E. Ottoni b,1, E. Visalberghi c, 2
a Department of Psychology, University of Georgia
b Department of Experimental Psychology, Institute of Psychology, University of Sa ˜o Paulo
c Istituto di Scienze e Tecnologie della Cognizione, Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, Rome
article info
Article history:
Received 22 May 2009
Initial acceptance 3 August 2009
Final acceptance 8 October 2009
Available online 24 December 2009
MS. number: A09-00338R
Keywords:
anvil
body weight
capuchin
Cebus libidinosus
efﬁciency
hammer stone
human
nut cracking
palm nut
tool use
Wild bearded capuchins, Cebus libidinosus , in Fazenda Boa Vista, Brazil crack tough palm nuts using
hammer stones. We analysed the contribution of intrinsic factors (body weight, behaviour), size of the
nuts and the anvil surface (ﬂat or pit) to the efﬁciency of cracking. We provided capuchins with local
palm nuts and a single hammer stone at an anvil. From video we scored the capuchins’ position and
actions with the nut prior to each strike, and outcomes of each strike. The most efﬁcient capuchin
opened 15 nuts per 100 strikes (6.6 strikes per nut). The least efﬁcient capuchin that succeeded in
opening a nut opened 1.32 nuts per 100 strikes (more than 75 strikes per nut). Body weight and diameter
of the nut best predicted whether a capuchin would crack a nut on a given strike. All the capuchins
consistently placed nuts into pits. To provide an independent analysis of the effect of placing the nut into
a pit, we ﬁlmed an adult human cracking nuts on the same anvil using the same stone. The human
displaced the nut on proportionally fewer strikes when he placed it into a pit rather than on a ﬂat surface.
Thus the capuchins placed the nut in a more effective location on the anvil to crack it. Nut cracking as
practised by bearded capuchins is a striking example of a plastic behaviour where costs and beneﬁts vary
enormously across individuals, and where efﬁciency requires years to attain.
/C2112009 The Association for the Study of Animal Behaviour. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Wild bearded capuchins, Cebus libidinosus, crack palm nuts
using a hammer stone and anvil ( Fragaszy et al. 2004a; Waga et al.
2006). Bearded capuchins in several other areas of the species’
range show this behaviour as well ( Ottoni & Izar 2008 ). In addition
to using percussive tools, wild bearded capuchins use probing and
scraping tools (Ottoni & Izar 2008; Mannu & Ottoni 2009 ). We now
recognize that bearded capuchins, like chimpanzees (e.g. Sugiyama
& Koman 1979; Kortlandt 1986; Kortlandt & Holzhaus 1987; Boesch
& Achermann-Boesch 2000; Sanz & Morgan 2007 ) routinely use
tools in foraging.
This phenomenon raises interesting questions about the costs
and beneﬁts of using tools in foraging by nonhuman animals. It has
been suggested that using tools broadens a population’s dietary
niche by making available resources otherwise unavailable with
anatomical equipment and that it enables more effective harvesting
of limited resources, both of which can be especially important
during periods of food scarcity (e.g. Beck 1980; Yamakoshi 1998;
Boesch & Achermann-Boesch 2000; Moura & Lee 2004 ). In contrast,
little attention has been devoted to the costs to nonhuman animals
of using tools, and we lack at present models to predict the variable
occurrence of tool use across species, individuals, time and space
(Haslam et al. 2009 ). The broad framework of optimal foraging
theory (Stephens & Krebs 1986; Altmann 1998), variations of which
conceptualize costs of behaviour in different currencies (e.g. time,
risk of predation or injury, energy), can be used to model the
occurrence of tool use, as well as other behaviours, from a cost–
beneﬁt perspective (S. Boinski & D. Fragaszy, unpublished data).
Here, we approach the topic of the costs of using tools to crack
nuts by wild bearded capuchin monkeys (hereafter, capuchins). We
adopt ‘strike’ as the smallest unit of activity that can affect cost of
the tool-using event, and assume that factors that affect the
number of strikes needed to crack a nut affect the cost of the
activity in the short term. We deﬁne efﬁciency in terms of
* Correspondence: D. Fragaszy, Department of Psychology, University of Georgia,
Athens, GA 30602, U.S.A.
E-mail addresses: dfragaszy@gmail.com, doree@uga.edu (D. Fragaszy).
1 P. Izar and E. Ottoni are at the Department of Experimental Psychology, Institute
of Psychology, University of Sa˜ o Paulo, Avenida Prof. Mello Moraes 1721, Sa˜ o Paulo,
SP 05508-030, Brazil.
2 E. Visalberghi is at the Laboratory of Comparative Cognition, ISTC, via Aldro-
vandi 16 B, Rome 00197, Italy.
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Animal Behaviour
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/anbehav
0003-3472/$38.00 /C2112009 The Association for the Study of Animal Behaviour. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.anbehav.2009.1 1.004
Animal Behaviour 79 (2010) 321–332

PDF PAGE 2
the number of strikes used to crack a nut. We were interested in
assessing the efﬁciency with which capuchins crack nuts and the
effect of particular behavioural and physical parameters (of the
capuchin, the nut, and the anvil) on efﬁciency.
At the EthoCebus research site in Fazenda Boa Vista, Brazil,
capuchins use hammer stones that range up to 2.5 kg, and average
1.1 kg in weight ( Visalberghi et al. 2007 ). The weight of larger
hammer stones corresponds to a signiﬁcant proportion of the
capuchins’ body weight (range 1.9–4.4 kg for adults in our group, as
we report below). Anvils are boulders or fallen logs, or occasionally
the crotch or bough of a large tree. The capuchins use anvils
habitually, forming pits in the anvils’ upper surface from repeated
striking in the same place (Visalberghi et al. 2007). Liu et al. (2009a)
describe the bimanual, bipedal action that capuchins use to crack
the nuts. The average striking cycle involves raising the hammer
stone vertically 33 cm, and pulling it downward to produce work
(4.2 J) upon striking the nut. Multiple strikes are typically required
to crack a whole palm nut, and sometimes a capuchin fails to open
the nut. Overall, cracking nuts is strenuous, noisy and time-
consuming. It generates costs in energy used and in time spent, risk
of injury and risk of predation from being on the ground and
producing a loud and easily localized sound. In accord with optimal
foraging theory ( Stephens & Krebs 1986 ), individuals should strive
to minimize these costs. Two effective ways to minimize costs are
to minimize the number of strikes used to open the nuts and to
minimize the loss of nuts and stones from inaccurate strikes and
poor control of the stone (which can result in the nut and/or the
stone falling off the anvil).
In the ﬁrst experiment (experiment 1) reported here, we
examine predictions about how speciﬁc intrinsic and extrinsic
variables affect an individual capuchin’s efﬁciency at cracking nuts.
We were particularly interested in the relation between body mass
(measured as weight) and efﬁciency, reasoning that individuals
with larger mass can add more energy to the stone in the down-
ward direction than can animals of lesser mass. Liu et al. (2009a)
reported that two females, whose body weight was estimated to be
1.5–2 kg less than the two adult males with whom they were
compared, produced less work on the stone than the males. Body
weight is also likely to correlate with muscle strength and thus the
ability of a capuchin to lift a stone and to control it while striking
the nut. Second, body weight is closely correlated with body length;
individuals with longer bodies can lift a stone higher, increasing its
kinetic energy even if they do not add additional energy to the
stone on its downward trajectory. For all of these reasons, longer/
heavier animals are predicted to be more efﬁcient at cracking nuts
than shorter/lighter individuals.
We also expected that the capuchin’s behaviour would affect the
efﬁciency of cracking. We made two predictions about the relation
between cracking behaviours and the outcome of cracking
attempts, based upon our observations of how the capuchins crack
nuts at our site. First, we predicted the nut would fall off the anvil
less often when capuchins placed the nut in a pit rather than on
a ﬂat section because the pit blocks lateral displacement of the nut.
Second, we predicted that the consistency of an individual’s use of
a particular body position relative to the anvil during cracking
would correlate with efﬁciency, reasoning that adopting a consis-
tent position allows reﬁnement of action in a familiar circumstance.
We also evaluated whether a particular body position relative to
the anvil or the placement of the nut on a ﬂat or pitted surface were
associated with greater efﬁciency.
Physical properties of the nut should also affect the outcome of
a cracking attempt. For example, the integrity of the nut shell
affects its resistance to cracking. In this study, we presented the
capuchins with one species of nut (tentatively identiﬁed as
Orbignya sp.; Visalberghi et al. 2008 ) locally called piaçava (or
piassava). The piaçava nuts cracked by the capuchins at Fazenda
Boa Vista contain two to six kernels in separate chambers ( Visal-
berghi et al. 2008 ). Thus, after the nut is cracked, one or more
kernels can be removed and eaten, but there are usually additional
chambers left to open, and capuchins often strike these partially
opened nuts (hereafter, partial nuts) to open the remaining
chambers. We expected that capuchins would crack partial nuts
with fewer strikes than whole nuts, and we were interested in
documenting the magnitude of the difference in efﬁciency when
cracking whole and partial nuts.
The size and shape of the nut may also be expected to affect the
number of strikes needed to crack it.Visalberghi et al. (2008)reported
that the piaçava nuts’ resistance to cracking increases with the weight
and diameter of the nut. Thus we predicted that larger nuts would
require more strikes to open them. Furthermore, we reasoned that the
curvature of the nut at the point where the stone strikes it could affect
the transfer of force from the stone to the nut because the force is
dispersed across a larger area on a ﬂatter surface. Thus, ﬂatter nuts
could be harder to crack than rounder nuts of the same diameter.
We obtained an independent measure of how placement of the
nut on the anvil affected efﬁciency and displacement of the nut
after striking by having an adult male human participate in
a parallel
experiment (experiment 2). By limiting the person to
many of the same constraints as the capuchins and providing the
nuts from the same collection and the same hammer stone and
anvil, we were able to use the person’s data to interpret the
capuchins’ data. Measuring a person’s performance when he
positioned the nut on different surfaces of the same anvil permitted
independent evaluation of the effect of using pits and ﬂat surfaces
on the outcomes of striking the nuts.
In summary, we determined how use of different features of the
anvils, shape and size of the nuts and capuchin’s body weight affected
the number of strikes a capuchin used to open a nut. We also evalu-
ated other outcomes of striking that affect the cost of the activity
(whether the stone fell off the anvil; whether the nut was displaced),
and we compared a person’s efﬁciency when cracking nuts in the
same circumstances. Jointly, these elements of the study allowed
a broad evaluation of the factors inﬂuencing capuchins’ efﬁciency at
cracking nuts and the costs to the capuchins for inefﬁcient actions.
EXPERIMENT 1: CAPUCHINS’ EFFICIENCY AT CRACKING NUTS
Methods
Site description
The EthoCebus ﬁeld site is located at Fazenda Boa Vista, privately
owned land, in Piauı ´ , Brazil (9
/C14 390S, 45 /C14 250W), at approximately
420 m above sea level. Fazenda Boa Vista is an area of Cerrado/
Caatinga (open woodland) ecotone (Oliveira & Marquis 2002 ). This
region has low-nutrient sandy soils and highly seasonal and
interannually variable precipitation, 800–1600 mm, the vast
majority coming in the summer months of November–April (Oli-
veira & Marquis 2002). Fragaszy et al. (2004a) and Visalberghi et al.
(2007) reported that anvil stones and logs and palms with fronds
and fruiting stalks emerging from the ground are abundant in this
area. Hard stones suitable for cracking these tough palm nuts are
present, although stones large enough and hard enough to crack
nuts (300 g or more) are rare (Visalberghi et al. 2008 ).
This study was conducted from early July to early August 2007.
The experiment took place in a forested area that contained
multiple stone anvils and a log anvil in close proximity. There were
ground palms in and around the local vicinity of the experimental
area, as in the region generally. The experimental protocol was
approved by the animal research committee (IACUC) at the
University of Georgia.
D. Fragaszy et al. / Animal Behaviour 79 (2010) 321–332322

PDF PAGE 3
Subjects
Eleven members (seven males and four females) of one group of
bearded capuchins, Cebus libidinosus (N ¼ 17) participated in the
experiment. Table 1 presents a list of all members of the group and
their body weight; Table 2 lists individual capuchins that partici-
pated in the experiment, together with data on their age, sex and
body weight. We assigned females of unknown age to adult status
on the basis of reproductive status. We assigned males of unknown
age to adult status on the basis of behaviour, size and appearance.
Smaller males that did not participate in courtship (N ¼ 2) were
classed as young adults.
Palm nuts
A local resident identiﬁed and collected the 210 palm nuts used
in this study. Table 3 presents descriptive data on the piaçava nuts
(Orbignya sp.; previously identiﬁed as Attalea; e.g. Fragaszy et al.
2004a) used in this study. These nuts were locally abundant,
although nuts of other species of palms were available to the
capuchins in their home range at this time. We elected to use
piaçava nuts as these are, according to our measurements, the most
resistant to cracking of the nut species the capuchins commonly
crack (Visalberghi et al. 2008). All the collected nuts had hard intact
shells and contained fully formed kernels. The mesocarp was
removed from the nuts after collection if necessary (most nuts
already lacked the mesocarp, which is frequently eaten by other
animals such as cows, goats and armadillos). This exposed the
tough woody capsule enclosing the endosperms (hereafter, the
kernels). Piaçava nuts can have two to six kernels, each fully
enclosed by the woody capsule. The nuts were weighed to the
nearest gram using an electronic scale (Polder /C212, Polder Inc., Port
Chester, NY, U.S.A.). We measured each nut’s length (mm), widest
diameter (mm) and second diameter (mm) using calipers; the
second diameter measurement was taken 90 degrees from where
the widest diameter measurement was taken (as described in
Visalberghi et al. 2008). A ﬂatness index was calculated for each nut
by dividing the smaller diameter by the widest diameter. Thus
a ﬂatness of 1.00 would indicate that the nut was perfectly round.
Each nut was assigned a number written along its side in indelible
ink so that it could be identiﬁed from a distance. Weight data were
lacking for 29 of the 210 nuts collected for the study. The Pearson
correlation between weight and widest diameter for 181 nuts was
þ0.87 (see also Visalberghi et al. 2008 ). As the two properties are
highly positively correlated, in all analyses involving nut size, we
used widest diameter, for which we had data for all of the collected
nuts.
During the course of testing, capuchins attempted to crack 189
whole nuts. We could identify the number label for 89 of these. We
could not identify the remaining 100 nuts and hereafter refer to
these as unknown nuts. Unknown nuts were visibly indistin-
guishable from identiﬁed nuts (lacking the mesocarp, etc.), except
we could not read an identiﬁcation mark. These nuts were likely to
have come from our experimental supply because alternative
sources of whole nuts were rare in that place at that time. If the ﬁrst
capuchin to attempt to crack a given nut failed, the nut potentially
could be ‘reused’ by a second or subsequent capuchin. We kept
track when this occurred for identiﬁed nuts.
Capuchins’ weights
Over the same time period in which we collected the nut-
cracking data, we measured the capuchins’ individual body
weights. This was done by mounting an electronic scale on a tree
using a metal stand (see Fig. 1 for picture of set-up). The stand
consisted of a vertical portion (73 /C2 18 cm) that was strapped
against a tree trunk. The horizontal platform (57 /C2 45 cm; 92 cm
above the ground) on the stand was covered with grey/brown
outdoor carpet. The scale (Cardinal Detecto 50 kg model, sensitivity
to 1 g; 30 /C2 35 /C2 5 cm) was bolted to the stand. A removable metal
collar (33 /C2 29 cm)
 attached to the distal portion of the platform
and a metal bowl (25 cm diameter, 16 cm deep) rested in the collar
at a distance of 7 cm from the scale. The rim of the bowl was the
same height as the platform. We provisioned the bowl with water
and kernels of corn. The weight of an object on the scale was dis-
played on a digital screen attached to the scale via a 280 cm long
cable.
The experimenter sat a few metres from the scale, viewing the
digital display, and recording the displayed weight when one
animal was stationary and fully supported by the scale as the
capuchins freely visited the provisioned bowl. We collected several
weights per capuchin and report the average.
Anvil
We collected all behavioural data as the capuchins cracked nuts
on one log anvil (1 m long, 12 cm high and 12 cm wide; see Fig. 2). A
tree bordering the log anvil on the west side afforded easy arboreal
access. This anvil was used frequently by all animals in the study
group and it afforded good visibility for direct observation and
ﬁlming. We designated ﬁve surface areas on the anvil on which the
capuchins could place a palm nut. Moving from the eastern anvil
side along its long axis to the western side (where the anvil abuts
the tree), surface A was ﬂat; surface B was a pit 1.9 cm in depth,
followed by small ﬂat surface C, a 1.5 cm wide area between the two
pits. The closest pit to the tree was surface D. This pit was 1.0 cm in
depth and was bordered by the ﬁnal ﬂat surface E on the farthest
west position (closest to the tree). The ﬂat surfaces A, C and E
sloped 5–10 degrees towards the southern side of the anvil.
Hammer stone
At the start of each day’s testing, we placed one hammer stone
(1.465 kg) near the anvil. We weighed the stone using the same
scale that we used to weigh the nuts. The stone was a roughly
ellipsoid quartzite cobble. This stone was used spontaneously and
often by all the capuchins that participated in this experiment prior
to the experiment, even when they could choose a lighter stone.
The stone was among the several stones, both lighter and heavier,
normally found at the cracking site. We removed all other stones
prior to testing and returned them each day at the end of testing.
Procedure
This experimental site has been provisioned daily (or periodi-
cally less often) by the landowner with bananas, nuts and/or dry
Table 1
Age, sex and weight of all capuchins in the study group
Individual Age Sex Weight (kg)
Chica˜ o Adult Male 4.4
Mansinho Adult Male 3.5
Dengoso Adult Male 3.3
Dita Adult Female 2.0
Piaçava Adult Female 1.9
ChuChu Adult Female 2.2
Dende Adult Female 1.9
Teninha Adult Female 2.2
Chiquinha Adult Female 2.4
Jatoba´ Young adult Male 2.7
Teimoso Young adult Male 2.7
Tucum Juvenile (30 months) Male 1.8
Caboclo Juvenile (30 months) ? 1.7
Pico Juvenile (20 months) ? 1.2
Tomate Infant (7 months) ? 0.8
Catu Infant (5 months) ? 0.6
D. Fragaszy et al. / Animal Behaviour 79 (2010) 321–332 323

PDF PAGE 4
corn and water since 2000. The capuchins came to the area on an
almost daily basis. The capuchins were thus habituated to close
human presence, and we were able to observe them consistently at
the provisioning site. We could easily identify every individual in
the group. We used a tripod-mounted mini DV camera (Canon /C212
GL2; Canon USA Inc., Lake Success, NY, U.S.A.) positioned at an
oblique angle 8 m from the anvil to ﬁlm all episodes of cracking. The
ﬁeld of view included the capuchin and anvil, and we could
distinguish the designated surface areas of the anvil from the video.
To begin a test session, we threw one of the previously measured
and marked nuts towards the anvil, and we threw additional single
nuts as needed as the session proceeded. We ﬁlmed each episode of
cracking from the time the capuchin approached the anvil until it
left the anvil. An experimenter audibly identiﬁed each capuchin
and narrated events to aid in future scoring from video. The number
of the nut the capuchin was striking was identiﬁed with the aid of
binoculars. Capuchins cracked on a voluntary basis and all indi-
viduals were recorded as often as they participated.
Behavioural coding
We collected behavioural data from video playback. We noted
every episode of cracking, identifying the capuchin, the nut number
(if possible to identify), and whether the nut was whole or partial.
Per strike, we noted the capuchin’s position relative to the anvil, the
nut position on the surface of the anvil, whether the nut cracked in
that strike, and if it did not crack, the outcome of the strike with
respect to displacement of the nut.
We used a clock-face rubric, with the western end of the log (by
the tree) designated as the 12 position, to record the capuchin’s
position relative to the anvil when it began each striking motion.
We pooled clock positions 2–4 into ‘position 3’ and clock positions
8–10 into ‘position 9’, producing eight possible positions. Figure 3
illustrates an adult female in position 9 ( Fig. 3a) and an adult male
in position 12 (Fig. 3 b). No capuchin ever used position 3. The
capuchins used the following seven positions: position 1: right foot
on anvil, left foot on ground; position 5: left foot on anvil, right foot
on ground, facing west; position 6: both feet on anvil facing west;
position 7: right foot on anvil, left foot on ground facing west;
position 9: both feet on ground facing north; position 1 1: left foot
on anvil, right foot on ground, facing east; position 12: both feet on
anvil, facing east.
If the nut did not crack on a given strike, we coded the outcome
of the strike with respect to displacement as follows.
Table 2
Efﬁciency, rank in efﬁciency and characteristics of the subject and the sample of nuts cracked by that subject
Individual Sex/age class * Efﬁciency rank Weight (kg) Efﬁciency y with Number of
Whole nuts Partial nuts Whole nuts Partial nuts Strikes
Mansinho A/M 1 3.5 15.20 32.78 32 22 225
Chica˜ o A/M 2 4.4 13.20 30.80 27 9 140
Dengoso A/M 3 3.3 9.12 29.20 37 27 374
Dita A/F 4 2.0 7.04 28.57 14 10 106
Tucum J/M 5 1.8 5.00 15.12 10 15 146
Piaçava A/F 6 1.9 3.31 25.50 9 16 169
Teimoso Y/M 7 2.7 3.09 18.90 11 10 150
Chuchu A/F 8 2.2 1.88 22.20 27 11 282
Jatoba´ Y/M 9 2.70 1.32 30.00 22 3 162
Dende A/F 10 1.94 6.30 0 7 63
Caboclo J/M 11 1.70 5.00 0 6 40
Human A/M NA 78 16.10 42.40 81 28 497
* A ¼ adult; Y ¼ young; J ¼ juvenile; M ¼ male; F ¼ female.
y Efﬁciency ¼ number of nuts opened per 100 strikes.
Table 3
Nut properties: number measured, weight, length, widest diameter and ﬂatness
N Minimum Maximum Mean SD
Weight (g) 181 14 80 45.55 13.52
Length (mm) 210 40 87 60.26 7.43
Widest diameter (mm) 210 27 59 40.97 5.28
Flatness
* 210 0.64 1 0.89 0.07
* Flatness ¼ second diameter measure divided by the widest diameter.
Figure 1. Capuchins’ weights were obtained using a mounted scale. The scale was
mounted 1 m above the ground with water and food provisioned at the distal end. An
experimenter, seated a few metres away, recorded the weight showing on the digital
display when one capuchin was fully supported by the scale. Photo: T. Pickering.
D. Fragaszy et al. / Animal Behaviour 79 (2010) 321–332324

PDF PAGE 5
(1) Fall: the nut fell within 1 m of the anvil. The capuchin had to
pick it up to continue cracking, but did not necessarily have to move
from its position.
(2) Fly: the nut ﬂew >1 m from the anvil. The capuchin had to
leave its position in order to retrieve and continue cracking the
same nut.
(3) Catch: the capuchin caught the nut as it bounced or rolled,
before it fell to the ground.
(4) Reposition: the capuchin picked up the nut although it had
not been displaced, replacing it immediately on the anvil or
inspecting it and then replacing it. The nut could be placed in its
previous location or another location on the anvil.
(5) Nothing: no nut displacement occurred and the capuchin did
not reposition the nut.
We also noted whether the capuchin let the stone slip to the
ground after a strike and therefore whether it had to lift the stone to
the surface of the anvil again before the next strike. We called this
variable ‘stone fall’. Stone fall could happen only when the capuchin
stood on the anvil while striking (i.e. positions 6 and 12). Normally
a capuchin standing in positions 6 or 12 let the stone rest on the
surface of the anvil between strikes, and in this way it lifted the
stone from the surface of the anvil at the next strike. If the stone fell
to the ground while the capuchin stood on the anvil, the capuchin
had to lift it to the surface of the anvil before lifting it in the next
strike, which added to the cost of the strike.
Stone lift height and body length measurements
From independently acquired video samples collected while the
monkeys cracked nuts at the same anvil, we calculated body length
(lower leg þ upper leg þ torso) for nine of the 1 1 capuchins using
standard two-dimensional measurement techniques (see Liu et al.
2009a for methodological details). These videos were collected in
the same time period as we conducted the experiment. The capu-
chins were ﬁlmed while cracking nuts outside of the experimental
sessions using a stone that weighed 1.42 kg (97% of the weight of
the stone used during the present study). We selected one to six
representative cracking episodes per individual, in accord with
their availability in the video corpus. From among these episodes,
we determined the single strike at which the stone reached its
maximum height. For this strike, we calculated the stone’s height
above the anvil, and the length of the capuchin’s body. We used
these data to evaluate the relation between the absolute and
proportional height the capuchins lifted the stone and their efﬁ-
ciency rank, reasoning that more efﬁcient capuchins would lift the
stone absolutely higher than would less efﬁcient capuchins, and
that more efﬁcient capuchins would raise the stone to a propor-
tionally greater height relative to body length than would less
efﬁcient capuchins.
Data analysis
Data were collated by individual. Efﬁciency was calculated per
individual as the number of strikes on whole nuts divided by the
number of whole nuts cracked, and expressed as the number of
whole nuts cracked per 100 strikes. A second efﬁciency score was
calculated per individual in the same manner, using the number of
strikes on partial nuts. We used paired t tests to compare efﬁciency
between partial and whole nuts and Pearson correlations to
Figure 2. A view of the anvil showing two pits (D and B) and the adjacent ﬂat surfaces
(A, C, E). Photo: T. Pickering.
Figure 3. Illustration of (a) an adult female and (b) an adult male bearded capuchin striking a piaçava nut with a hammer stone on the log anvil. The female is standing in position 9
and the male is standing in position 12. A piaçava nut is clearly visible on the anvil in (a). Photos: E. Visalberghi.
D. Fragaszy et al. / Animal Behaviour 79 (2010) 321–332 325

PDF PAGE 6
evaluate relations among individuals’ efﬁciencies on whole nuts
and body weight. For the paired t test, we report Hedge’s unbiased
d as a measure of effect size, together with conﬁdence interval (CI)
for the Hedge’s d.
We conducted a logistic regression analysis (with SPSS v. 16)
using the ﬁnal strike per nut as the unit of analysis, and cracked or
not cracked as the binary outcome variable. The nine capuchins
that cracked whole nuts contributed data to this analysis. We
selected cracking episodes with whole nuts, using only the episode
from the ﬁrst capuchin that attempted to crack any particular nut
(as some nuts were attempted by more than one capuchin). The
data set included strikes on 69 whole nuts, 40 of which were
cracked.
This analysis used the likelihood ratio test of signiﬁcance. The
likelihood ratio test compares the goodness of ﬁt of the model
including a given predictor to the model omitting that predictor
(Cohen et al. 2003 ). Predictor variables included the body weight of
the capuchin striking the nut, the capuchin’s position on the anvil
at this (last) strike, the location of the nut on the anvil surface, the
diameter of the nut, the ﬂatness index of the nut, and the number of
the last strike. Body weight, nut diameter, ﬂatness index and
number of strikes were centred in the analysis. We report Nagel-
kerke R
2 as a measure of the null deviance accounted for by the set
of predictors, where the maximum value is 1.0. The Nagelkerke R2
provides a logistic analogy to R2 (used in ordinary least squares
regression). The Nagelkerke measure varies from 0 to 1, as does R2
in ordinary least squares regression. The Hosmer–Lemeshow
goodness-of-ﬁt test was used to conﬁrm that the model’s estimates
ﬁt the data at an acceptable level; P > 0.05 for this test indicates
acceptable ﬁt of the model to the data.
Results
Capuchins’ body weight and body length
The weight and body length of each capuchin is shown in Table
1. The largest capuchin, an adult male, weighed 4.4 kg. The adult
females were much smaller, ranging from 1.9 to 2.2 kg. Adult males
averaged 3.7 kg ( N ¼ 3) and adult females, 2.1 kg (N ¼ 6). The
animal with the smallest body weight in the group that cracked
nuts was a juvenile, 30 months old (Caboclo, 1.7 kg). Body length for
adult animals that cracked nuts ranged from 0.347 to 0.408 m (see
Table 4).
Nut sizes and weights
Nuts weighed an average /C6 SD of 46 /C6 13.5 g and had
a mean /C6 SD length of 60 /C6 7.4 mm, a mean /C6 SD widest diameter
of 41.0 /C6 5.3 mm and a mean /C6 SD ﬂatness index of 0.89 /C6 0.07.
Maximum and minimum values for these variables are given in
Table 3 . Nut weight and nut length were strongly correlated
(Pearson correlation: r
17 9¼þ 0.62), as were nut weight and widest
diameter (r87 ¼þ 0.87).
Nut-cracking efﬁciency
The data set consisted of 1857 strikes on 189 whole nuts and 136
partial nuts. Individual efﬁciencies (expressed as the number of
nuts cracked per 100 strikes) for whole and partial nuts are pre-
sented in Table 2. This table also presents the number of nuts for
each category that each capuchin attempted to open. Since there
was a high correlation (Pearson correlation: r
7 ¼þ 0.85, P < 0.01)
between efﬁciencies with nuts of known size and unknown nuts,
we pooled data for known and unknown nuts in our analyses.
Efﬁciency scores to crack whole nuts ranged from 1.32 to 15.20
(see Table 2 ). That is, capuchins cracked 1–15 nuts per hundred
strikes, or expressed another way, individual capuchins used on
average 6.6 to 75.8 strikes to crack one whole nut. Some capuchins
often failed to crack a particular nut and abandoned it to try
another. The greatest number of consecutive strikes used to open
a single nut was 57 (made by an adult female). Efﬁciency on partial
nuts ranged from 5.0 to 32.8 (5–33 partial nuts cracked per 100
strikes). All nine capuchins that cracked whole nuts used fewer
strikes to crack partial nuts than they did to crack whole nuts
(paired t test: t
8 ¼ 1 1.50,P < 0.001; Hedge’s d ¼ 1.38, 95% CI ¼ 0.26,
2.50). Individuals’ efﬁciency at cracking whole nuts correlated
moderately with their efﬁciency at cracking partial nuts (Pearson
correlation: r
7 ¼þ 0.59, P < 0.10). Two capuchins (one juvenile and
one older adult female) attempted to crack partial nuts but not
whole nuts. These two capuchins held the lowest efﬁciency scores
on partial nuts of all subjects (see Table 2).
Effect of body weight on efﬁciency
The capuchins’ weights were signiﬁcantly positively correlated
(Pearson correlation: r
7 ¼þ 0.75, P < 0.05) with their efﬁciencies at
cracking whole nuts (see Fig. 4 ). The smallest capuchin to crack
a whole nut weighed 1.8 kg. The correlation between body weight
and efﬁciency at cracking partial nuts was also signiﬁcant
(r9 ¼þ 0.66, P < 0.05).
Relations among maximum height of lift, trunk length and efﬁciency
Table 4 illustrates each capuchin’s trunk length, the maximum
height above the anvil to which it lifted the stone, and its rank order
for these two variables and for efﬁciency. All the capuchins lifted
the stone a greater height than the length of their trunk. The
Table 4
Rank of the maximum height to which each capuchin lifted the stone, together with
the length of its trunk, the ratio of its trunk length to the height to which it lifted the
stone, and the rank of its overall efﬁciency
*
Subject Rank,
highest
lift
Stone
height
(cm)
Trunk
length
(cm)
Stone height/
trunk length
Efﬁciency y
Mansinho 1 65 40 1.64 1
Dengoso 2 52 37 1.42 3
Chica˜ o 3 49 41 1.21 2
Dita 4.5 44 37 1.18 4
Chu Chu 4.5 44 35 1.25 7
Jatoba´ 6 43 37 1.16 8
Piaçava 7.5 42 35 1.21 6
Tucum 7.5 42 36 1.17 5
Caboclo 9 40 35 1.14 9
Average 46.8 37.0 1.26
* These data were available for a subset of the capuchins that cracked nuts.
y Rank order of efﬁciency on whole nuts among this subset of individuals.
16
Efficiency with whole nuts
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5
Wei
ght (kg)
4 4.5 5
Figure 4. Capuchin’s efﬁciency at cracking nuts, measured as the number of nuts
cracked per 100 strikes, plotted by weight. Line of best ﬁt is shown.
D. Fragaszy et al. / Animal Behaviour 79 (2010) 321–332326

PDF PAGE 7
maximum absolute height to which the capuchin lifted the stone
was signiﬁcantly positively correlated with efﬁciency (Pearson
correlation: r6 ¼þ 0.83, P < 0.05) and nearly as strongly correlated
with the proportion of the individual’s trunk length (r 6 ¼þ 0.68,
P ¼ 0.06). That is, more efﬁcient capuchins raised the stone higher
and tended to raise the stone a greater proportion of their trunk
length. Figure 3 b shows the adult male Mansinho, the most efﬁ-
cient capuchin, lifting a stone well above his head.
Outcomes of striking: displacements, catches, repositions
and stone falls
Per capuchin, on average, the nut was displaced following 34% of
strikes (range 1 1–68). On 16% of these events, the capuchins caught
the nut before it fell off the anvil (range 0–59% of strikes per
capuchin). On 67% of those strikes when it was displaced, it fell
within 1 m; on the other 33% the nut ﬂew more than 1 m from the
anvil. When the capuchins stood at positions 6 or 12, the stone fell
off the anvil on 3.5% of strikes on average (range 0–16.4% of strikes
per capuchin taken from these positions). The probability that the
nut would be displaced after it was struck was modestly negatively
correlated with the efﬁciency of the capuchin striking the nut
(Pearson correlation: r
7 ¼/C0 0.557, P ¼ 0.12).
Use of different parts of the anvil surface and body position
Table 5 presents the data for the proportion of strikes that each
capuchin made with the nut in one of the two pits, its bias to use
a particular position on the anvil, and which position it preferred
for both whole and partial nuts. The majority of the capuchins (5 of
9) exclusively used one or both of the anvil pit surfaces while
cracking whole nuts. The other four individuals struck a whole nut
at least once while it was on a ﬂat surface, but these individuals still
used pits on at least 79% of their strikes. In contrast, ﬁve of 1 1
capuchins used ﬂat surfaces for the majority of their strikes on
partial nuts. All nine capuchins that cracked whole nuts used ﬂat
surfaces more often with partial nuts than with whole nuts (bino-
mial test: k ¼ 0, N ¼ 9, P ¼ 0.002; average of 43% of strikes on a ﬂat
surface, partial nuts, versus 4% of strikes on a ﬂat surface, whole
nuts). Overall, the odds ratio for cracking a partial nut versus
a whole nut on a ﬂat surface was 38.2.
Each individual used one of the three positions (6, 9 and 12) on
greater than 50% of strikes on whole nuts. In these positions both
feet were placed at the same level. The capuchins maintained their
preference for a given position and the same magnitude of pref-
erence for that position when they cracked partial nuts and whole
nuts (average use of one position on partial nuts ¼ 69%, whole
nuts ¼ 73%). Four capuchins were more consistent in the use of one
position when cracking whole nuts than when cracking partial
nuts, and ﬁve capuchins were more consistent when cracking
partial nuts than when cracking whole nuts. The magnitude of an
individual’s preference for one position was not signiﬁcantly
correlated with its efﬁciency (Pearson correlation: r
7 ¼/C0 0.256,
P ¼ 0.505).
Relation between body position with respect to the anvil
and outcome of the strike
The position that the capuchin assumed while cracking affected
the proportion of strikes resulting in displacement of the nut (see
Table 6). Position 9 (facing the anvil, standing on the ground) and
position 6 (on one end of the log) were associated with a higher
percentage of displacements (totalling 30% and 27% of all strikes for
positions 9 and 6, respectively, compared to 19% for position 12; see
Table 6).
Although a preference for a speciﬁc position affected the rate of
displacement, position preference was not associated with efﬁ-
ciency. The mean efﬁciency rank (out of 1 1) for capuchins prefer-
ring position 6 was 4.7 (N ¼ 3); for position 9, 7.4 ( N ¼ 5), and for
position 12, 5.0 ( N ¼ 3). Dengoso and Mansinho each cracked more
than 20 nuts and had equivalent efﬁciencies for nuts cracked
entirely in positions 9 and 6. Dengoso’s efﬁciency scores were 12.5
for position 6 and 1 1.8 for position 9; Mansinho’s scores were 17.2
and 16.7 for the same comparison.
Regression models of the likelihood of cracking a nut
Two factors were identiﬁed in the stepwise logistic regression as
signiﬁcantly improving the ﬁt of the model: body weight
(
b1 ¼ 1.023, P ¼ 0.009) and the diameter of the nut ( b1 ¼/C0 0.177,
P ¼ 0.007). The odds ratio for diameter of the nut was 0.838, and for
weight, 2.782, with Nagelkerke R2 ¼ 0.234. The Hosmer–Lemeshow
goodness-of-ﬁt test ( c7
2 ¼ 10.994, P ¼ 0.139) indicated that the
model ﬁt the data at an acceptable level. Increasing body weight
improved the likelihood of cracking the nut; increasing diameter of
the nut decreased the likelihood. Flatness index, placement of the
nut on the anvil (into a pit or on a ﬂat surface), and consistency of
the capuchin’s position relative to the anvil did not signiﬁcantly
affect the likelihood of cracking the nut.
EXPERIMENT 2: EFFECT OF NUT POSITIONING
Methods
In this experiment we evaluated whether nut positioning (in
a pit versus on a ﬂat surface) inﬂuenced nut-cracking efﬁciency and
the probability of displacing the nut by striking it. We worked with
a human participant so that we could generate a sufﬁcient number
of cases where the nut was placed on a ﬂat surface for statistical
Table 5
Capuchins’ preferences to use a pitted surface on the anvil and to use one position
relative to the anvil, and their preferred body position for whole and for partial nuts
Subject Whole nuts Partial nuts
% Strikes
in pit
% Strikes
from one
position
Preferred
position
% Strikes
in pit
% Strikes
from one
position
Preferred
position
Mansinho 100 85 6 61 88 6
Chica˜ o 93 63 9 15 69 9
Dengoso 100 58 6 75 51 6
Dita 79 54 12 43 63 12
Tucum 95 67 12 71 78 12
Piaçava 99 93 12 45 53 12
Teimoso 100 59 9 68 77 9
Chuchu 100 87 9 42 75 9
Jatoba´ 100 88 9 90 70 9
Dende 52 51 6
Caboclo 12 42 9
Capuchins are ordered by rank in efﬁciency on whole nuts, as in Table 2.
Table 6
Displacement of whole nuts as a function of the capuchins’ position with respect to
the anvil, and the capuchins’ actions after each strike
Position 6 Position 12 Position 9
Number of strikes 428 218 606
% Catches 1.7 4.6 6.9
% Falls 21.6 13.4 18.1
% Flies 3.9 1.0 5.0
Sum % Displacements 27.2 19.0 30.0
% Repositions 42.1 38.1 39.3
% Nothing 30.7 42.9 30.7
Sum 100.0 100.0 100.0
In positions 6 and 12 the capuchin was standing on the anvil, and in position 9 the
capuchin was standing on the ground perpendicular to the anvil.
D. Fragaszy et al. / Animal Behaviour 79 (2010) 321–332 327

PDF PAGE 8
analysis. The experiment was conducted at the same site and in the
same time frame as experiment 1, and made use of the same
hammer stone, anvil and nuts. The experiment proceeded in four
phases, each conducted on a different day. In phase 1, the person
cracked 20 nuts. He was free to choose the anvil surface (ﬂat or pit).
In phase 2, the person cracked 40 nuts, alternating between ﬂat and
pit surfaces (one surface type per nut). In phase 3, the person
cracked 21 nuts, and as in phase 1, he was free to choose the surface
position. In phases 1 and 3, where the person could choose the
surface, he usually cracked each nut using a single surface type. In
phase 4, the person cracked 28 partial nuts, and he was free to
choose the surface position.
Participant
One physically ﬁt adult male (20 years, 185 cm, 78 kg) partici-
pated in the experiment. He wore gloves (Ironclad /C212utility work
gloves, Ironclad Inc., El Segundo, CA, U.S.A.) while cracking. The
participant had seen the capuchins cracking nuts and he had
previously cracked about ﬁve of these palm nuts with a stone
before participating in this experiment. Before he began, we
explained that we were interested in comparing outcomes of
cracking nuts in pits and on ﬂat surfaces, but we did not indicate
what those outcomes might be.
Procedure
The person cracked nuts in a seated position using position 9
(facing the long axis of the anvil), at a self-selected distance from
the anvil (see Fig. 5). He held the stone bimanually at the long axis,
as the capuchins held it. An experimenter held a stick horizontally
45 cm above the anvil, which marked the limit above which the
person was not to raise the hammer stone (approximately the
height to which the capuchins lifted the hammer stone). All trials
were videotaped in the same manner as in experiment 1. From
playback we coded the same behaviours for the person as for the
capuchins, except body position relative to the anvil and maximum
lift height, because these variables were ﬁxed. The protocol for this
experiment was approved by the University of Georgia Institutional
Review Board.
Analysis
We calculated efﬁciency for the person in the same manner as
for the capuchins. Using Welch’s t tests (an adaptation of Student’s t
test intended for use with two samples having possibly unequal
variances; Welch 1947), we compared the number of strikes that
the person used to open whole nuts placed on a ﬂat surface of the
anvil and placed in a pit, and we made the same comparison for
partial nuts. To evaluate whether the person’s efﬁciency per nut
was affected in the same direction as the capuchins’ efﬁciencies by
the size or ﬂatness of the nut, we calculated the Pearson correlation
between each of these variables and the number of strikes to crack
the nut and the proportion of strikes in which the nuts was
displaced. We used two-tailed alpha ¼ 0.05 for determinations of
signiﬁcance.
Results
The person cracked 81whole nuts and 28 partial nuts in 563
strikes. His efﬁciency was 16.1 for whole nuts and 42.4 for partial
nuts. Across phases 1–3, in which he cracked only whole nuts, his
efﬁciency scores were consistent (range 15.2–1 7.2). He cracked
three whole nuts and six partial nuts on a combination of surfaces,
and he cracked all others fully on a ﬂat surface or on a pit surface.
For whole nuts, his efﬁciency was 16.3 on pit surfaces ( N ¼ 57) and
16.8 on ﬂat surfaces ( N ¼ 22) ( t
77 ¼/C0 0.396, P ¼ 0.77). For partial
nuts, his efﬁciency was 56.3 when the nut was on the ﬂat surface
(N ¼ 9), and 52.0 when the nut was in a pit ( N ¼ 13). As for whole
nuts, this difference was not signiﬁcant ( t20 ¼/C0 0.396, P ¼ 0.70).
Table 7 presents the ﬁndings for the displacement of whole nuts
following a strike by the person when he placed the nut in a pit
versus on a ﬂat surface. He displaced whole nuts proportionally
more often when he struck them on a ﬂat surface than when he
struck them in a pit (27% versus 3%, respectively). This distribution
was signiﬁcantly different than expected ( c1
2 ¼ 61.4, N ¼ 497 ,
P < 0.001), and the odds ratio was 10.3. When the person struck
a partial nut, he displaced it on just eight strikes out of 66 (12% of
strikes). Six cases (75% of displacements) occurred when he struck
the partial nut on a ﬂat surface.
The diameter of the nut was positively correlated with the
number of strikes that the person required to crack it (Pearson
correlation: r78 ¼þ 0.263, P ¼ 0.018) and the proportion of
displacements that resulted ( r78 ¼þ 0.230, P ¼ 0.04). The correla-
tions between ﬂatness index and the proportion of strikes on which
Figure 5. A young man cracked piaçava nuts using the same hammer stone (in his
hands) and log anvil as the capuchins. He sat on a small log and cracked open palm
nuts in varying anvil surface positions. Photo: E. Visalberghi.
Table 7
Displacement of whole nuts when struck by a person as a function of their place-
ment in a pit or ﬂat surface
Variable Flat Pit
Number of nuts 22 57
Number of strikes 125 372
% Strikes (out of 497) 25.15 74.85
Number of falls 17
* 7
% Strikes that were falls 13.60 1.88
Number of ﬂies 17 6
% Strikes that were ﬂies 13.60 1.61
* Includes two catches.
D. Fragaszy et al. / Animal Behaviour 79 (2010) 321–332328

PDF PAGE 9
the nut was displaced were much smaller and not signiﬁcant
(r78 ¼/C0 0.159 and r78 ¼þ 0.048, respectively).
DISCUSSION
Wild bearded capuchins crack nuts that are extremely resistant
to cracking ( Visalberghi et al. 2008 ), striking them repeatedly with
a heavy stone from a bipedal posture (Liu et al. 2009a). We consider
this a costly foraging activity in terms of energy expenditure, time
and risk. Here we show that individual capuchins in the same
group, encountering the same conditions, vary in efﬁciency
(expressed as the number of nuts opened per 100 strikes) over
more than a 10-fold range, from 1 to 15 nuts opened per 100 strikes.
Thus this behaviour provides an opportunity to evaluate costs and
beneﬁts of using a tool in foraging across a wide scale of individual
variation. We found that features of the nut, the anvil and the
capuchin affect efﬁciency in nut cracking (considered in terms of
the number of strikes) and in the probability that the nut will be
displaced after it has been struck. Two unique features of our study
are that we obtained individual weights of the capuchins, allowing
us to investigate the contribution of body mass, and we evaluated
a human cracking nuts on the same anvil as the capuchins,
providing an independent evaluation of the inﬂuence of placement
on efﬁciency and displacement of the nut after striking, and the
relationship between the ﬂatness and the diameter of the nut and
these variables. Together, these data allow us to begin to under-
stand the factors that make a nut easier or more difﬁcult to crack,
and two aspects of cost (the number of strikes and the probability
of displacing the nut by striking it) of cracking nuts for individual
capuchins.
Body Weights
Before addressing efﬁciency at cracking nuts and factors
affecting it, we comment on our experiences weighing the capu-
chins and their body weights. To our knowledge, we present the
ﬁrst data for wild capuchins weighed by voluntary participation
(rather than following capture). Altmann & Alberts (1987) pio-
neered voluntary weighing with wild baboons, using a balance
scale set on the ground where the baboons would stand on it as
they descended from their sleeping trees. Goodall (1986; also see
Pusey et al. 2005 ) had earlier pioneered using a suspension scale
with a climbing rope to weigh wild chimpanzees. Battery-powered
digital balance scales make this procedure easier, so long as the
digital read out is visible from a distance at which the capuchins
tolerate a human observer. We used a digital display attached to
a tree-mounted scale via a 5 m cable, provided by the manufacturer
as standard equipment with the scale, for this purpose. Providing
a desirable, nonportable resource (water in the case of our capu-
chins) proved a sufﬁcient incentive for the capuchins to stand on
the scale. The capuchins needed just a few days to habituate to the
scale, and all monkeys in the group, even subordinate individuals,
used the scale site. Perhaps placement of the scale 1 m above the
ground contributed to their quick habituation. We obtained
multiple weights per individual over the course of several days.
Thus this method proved practical with our group. We hope that
others can adapt this method for use at other sites and with other
species. Given that body weight and changes in body weight over
time are important indexes of health and growth, obtaining these
data directly from wild populations is extremely useful. Live-trap-
ping procedures, in which the animals walk into a trap to collect
something and are then tagged/weighed and otherwise measured,
is effective for some species (e.g. Callithrix jacchus; Arau´ jo et al.
2000), and bypasses the need for real-time monitoring, but we did
not want to risk the capuchins avoiding the place where an
individual was previously trapped. Furthermore, we did not expect
that we could reliably capture all animals in the group with this
method, and we wanted a procedure that we could repeat at
intervals, to develop a longitudinal record.
The body weights of adults in our group were more sexually
dimorphic than we expected on the basis of published literature
(reviewed in Fragaszy et al. 2004b). Average weight of adult females
in our group (2.1 kg, N ¼ 6) was 57% that of adult males (3.7 kg,
N ¼ 3). The average of male and female average weights (2.9 kg)
indicates this population is slightly heavier, by this index, than
C. olivaceus and C. apella, for which Ford & Davis (1992) reported
2.7 kg, and substantially lighter than C. capucinus (3.3 kg), with
C. albifrons much lighter than all these species (2.1 kg). Additional
data t
o increase our sample size will be welcomed.
Variables Impacting the Capuchins’ Efﬁciency
The weight of a capuchin was the single best predictor of its
efﬁciency. Adult males weighed more than adult females and
juveniles. Adult males, which weighed 3.5 kg or more, were far
more efﬁcient than females and juveniles. However, adult females
and 3-year-old juveniles differed in weight by only a few hundred
grams, and efﬁciencies for these capuchins clustered together, at
between one and seven nuts opened per 100 strikes. In this
group, weight was not a strong predictor of efﬁciency. For
example, two subadult males weighing 2.7 kg each were ranked 7
and 9 in efﬁciency, out of 1 1 capuchins, bracketing an adult
female that weighed 2.2 kg, and below two other adult females
that weighed 1.9 and 2.0 kg. Thus, it is important to identify the
contribution of other factors, in addition to weight, to efﬁciency.
Future studies will evaluate how aspects of the capuchins’
behaviour, such as control of the stone’s downward trajectory or
the extent to which the capuchin can add force to the downward
trajectory, inﬂuence efﬁciency.
Our predictions that differences in efﬁciency would correlate
with how the capuchins positioned themselves at the anvil and
how they positioned the nut on the anvil were partially conﬁrmed.
Capuchins consistently placed whole nuts into a pit on the anvil
before striking them. Use of a pit reduced the human’s probability
of displacing a whole nut by striking it. Thus, it can be argued that,
by placing a nut into a pit, the capuchins reduce the probability of
displacing the nut by striking it. Displacing the nut constitutes
a cost, as the capuchin loses time retrieving it, may not ﬁnd it, and
may lose access to the hammer stone and to the anvil by leaving
them to search for the lost nut. Minimizing displacement of the nut
is one strategy to reduce the cost of nut cracking. All capuchins in
this study adopted this strategy. Whether the person struck the nut
in the pit or on the ﬂat surface did not affect his efﬁciency, sug-
gesting that the capuchins’ choice of using the pit rather than the
ﬂat surface reﬂects aversion to the higher probability of displacing
the nut, rather than expectations about efﬁciency.
The capuchins’ individual preferences for where they stood in
relation to the anvil when cracking (facing the long axis of the log
while standing on the ground, or standing on either end of the log)
did not affect efﬁciency, as long as they consistently used a position
with both feet at the same level (that is, positions 6, 9 and 12, in our
clock-face rubric, where 6 and 12 are standing at one of the two
ends of the log). There was more variation across and within
individuals in this aspect of behaviour than in others that we
measured, and position seems a good candidate to examine as an
index of skill development. Standing with the two feet at different
heights (that is, positions 1, 5, 7 and 1 1 in our clock-face rubric)
requires asymmetric work to maintain postural stability, and may
decrease postural stability during lifting and striking, and/or reduce
the ability to add force in downswing.
D. Fragaszy et al. / Animal Behaviour 79 (2010) 321–332 329

PDF PAGE 10
How often the nut was displaced after it was struck, or was
caught after it was displaced, and how often the stone fell off the
anvil after a strike (this last variable was coded only if the capuchin
was standing on the anvil; i.e. in position 6 or 12) did not vary in
accord with individual efﬁciency. Nor did the ﬂatness of the nut
affect the number of strikes that a capuchin used to open a given
nut. However, the diameter of the nut was identiﬁed in regression
analyses as affecting the number of strikes used to crack a nut;
larger diameters decreased the probability that a nut would crack
on a given strike (i.e. increased the number of strikes used to open
a nut). This ﬁnding is in accord with the ﬁnding that piaçava nuts
with greater weight (signiﬁcantly positively correlated with diam-
eter in this study) are more resistant to cracking under constant
load than nuts of the same species with lower weight ( Visalberghi
et al. 2008 ). The human’s performance cracking the same nuts on
the same anvil provides convergent evidence that diameter of the
nuts affects resistance to cracking but ﬂatness does not. Diameter of
the nut negatively affected the person’s efﬁciency in the same
direction as it affected the capuchins’, and also positively affected
the probability that the nut would be displaced when the person
struck it. Flatness of the nut did not affect either of these outcomes.
Thus capuchins seeking to reduce the costs of cracking nuts should
select smaller nuts, but the shape of the nut is not important.
Capuchins at our site crack several species of nuts, and we know
that the species vary in their resistance to cracking ( Visalberghi
et al. 2008 ). Of the four species tested by Visalberghi et al. (2008) ,
the nuts we used in this study are the most resistant to cracking
(peak force at failure ¼ 1 1.50 kN, range 7–1 7), in part because they
have an internal woody capsule around each kernel that makes
them particularly resistant to failure. To keep this value in
perspective, Visalberghi et al. (2008) reported that peak force at
failure for walnuts is 0.37 kN, and for macadamia nuts, 2.2 kN, and
Panda oleosa , the hardest nuts that wild chimpanzees crack, have
a peak force at failure of 9.57 to 12.22 kN.
Peak force at failure under constant load increases with weight
in piaçava nuts, which as we have shown here is highly positively
correlated with diameter, and other species of nuts follow this
pattern ( Visalberghi et al. 2008 ). However, it is possible that
resistance of the nuts varies if the shell becomes more brittle as it
dries, and force required for failure may also vary as a function of
the mechanical properties of the hammer stone and anvil (their
stiffness, for example). We do not yet know how mechanical
properties of nuts, stones and anvils vary, nor how these variations
affect efﬁciency; we are currently collecting such data. At this time
we merely point out that we expect variation in efﬁciency at
cracking nuts even if the capuchin’s body weight and the diameter
of the nut are unchanged, as a function of variation in the resistance
of the nuts to cracking and variation in the mechanical properties of
other components in the system (i.e. the stone and the anvil).
Efﬁciency must be regarded as a characteristic of the combination
of capuchin’s mass and behaviour as well as the nut, anvil and
hammer, not the capuchin alone.
Sources of Individual Variation in Efﬁciency
One factor that accounted for some variability across individuals
in efﬁciency of nut cracking was how high they lifted the stone. To
a great degree this variable was affected by the size and strength of
the individual capuchins, which was reﬂected in the strong positive
correlation between body weight and efﬁciency. Efﬁciency is also
likely to be dependent on the capuchin’s control of the stone and
the angle of its impact on the nut. Kinematic studies are needed to
examine individual patterns in these aspects of cracking, as well as
on the work performed on the stone (Liu et al. 2009a). Linking these
aspects of cracking to efﬁciency and to choice of actions and
materials under varying conditions (such as when choosing among
stones, using stones of different weight or cracking nuts of different
hardness) and across individuals offers rich opportunities to
examine how the capuchins perceive the problem of cracking nuts,
and where acquired skill enters into the picture.
Unfortunately our small sample size does not support statistical
analysis of individual differences in efﬁciency along lines of age, sex
or social status. Although we do not think it likely that dominance
status determined efﬁciency in this study, it probably inﬂuenced
individuals’ participation in the study. For example, during the
experiment, subordinate individuals usually cracked elsewhere, on
the margins of the group, rather than at the experimental anvil.
However, outside of experimental sessions, subordinate individuals
used the experimental anvil and the experimental stone, indicating
that it was the immediate social context that affected their use of
these materials during experimental sessions. With respect to age,
animals younger than 3 years were not active participants in this
experiment. Longitudinal studies suggest that young capuchins do
not crack nuts effectively, even smaller nuts using smaller stones
than we used in this study, until they are more than 2 years old
(Resende et al. 2008; Liu et al. 2009b ).
Effect of Flat and Pit Surfaces on a Human’s Efﬁciency
at Cracking Nuts
A human
cracking the same species of nuts using the same stone
and anvil showed similar patterns as did the capuchins with
respect to the association between the diameter of the nut and the
number of strikes needed to open the nut, and with respect to
the large difference in efﬁciency with whole versus partial nuts. The
human used more strikes to crack larger nuts than smaller nuts,
and more strikes to crack whole nuts than partial nuts. Thus, we can
use the person’s data to evaluate the effects of properties of the nut
and the anvil surface on the capuchins’ efﬁciency.
The human participant cracked whole nuts equally efﬁciently
using ﬂat and pit surfaces, and he did the same for partial nuts.
However, when he struck whole nuts placed on a ﬂat surface, he
was signiﬁcantly more likely to displace them than if he placed
them in a pit (there were too few cases in which a partial nut was
displaced after it was struck to evaluate this contingency statisti-
cally). Thus, the capuchins’ strong preference for placing whole
nuts into a pit can be interpreted as a reasonable strategy to reduce
the probability of displacing the nut. For comparison, capuchins
struck whole nuts on ﬂat surfaces just 27 times; the nuts were
displaced on 52% of these strikes. When capuchins struck whole
nuts placed in a pit, the nuts were displaced on 31% of strikes.
Choice and Variation in Efﬁciency
In our study the capuchins were constrained to use one hammer
stone, one anvil, and the nuts we provided. We know from this
study that choice of nut matters for efﬁciency, and from other data
we know that the capuchins prefer nuts that are easy to crack,
unlike the whole piaçava nuts used in this study, with which they
have lower efﬁciency at cracking ( Spagnoletti 2009 ; D. Fragaszy,
R. Greenberg, E. Visalberghi & Q. Liu, unpublished data).
We also know from other studies that the capuchins prefer
anvils (and their associated pits) associated with higher efﬁciency
(Q. Liu & D. Fragaszy, unpublished data). Finally, we know that
capuchins prefer heavy to light hammer stones, even when the
difference in weight of the stones is a few hundred grams, and the
ratio of the weight difference is 1.3:1 ( Visalberghi et al. 2009 ;
D. Fragaszy, R. Greenberg, E. Visalberghi & Q. Liu, unpublished data).
Although we have not yet determined the effect of the weight of the
stone on efﬁciency of cracking, it seems safe to assume that using
D. Fragaszy et al. / Animal Behaviour 79 (2010) 321–332330

PDF PAGE 11
a heavier stone decreases the number of strikes needed to crack
a nut. Thus it seems that the capuchins are attentive to the costs of
nut cracking, and their choices of all the elements involved (nut,
stone, anvil surface) are directed towards reducing the number of
strikes. Our results also indicate that the capuchin’s body weight is
an important component in efﬁciency, and of course the individual
cannot modify this for the purpose of cracking nuts. But, as Chalk
et al. (2008) and Wright et al. (2009) showed, the capuchins at our
study site eat foods with a wide range of hardnesses. Thus they
need not always crack foods as resistant to cracking as piaçava nuts.
Spagnoletti (2009) notes that adult males crack a larger proportion
of palm nuts than other resistant food items, compared to adult
females and juveniles. Further work is needed to determine
whether sexes and ages differ overall in their propensity to crack
foods of different resistance, but we expect that males are more
likely to attempt to crack highly resistant foods than are females
and juveniles. At other sites, capuchins crack much smaller items
than the nuts we presented, using smaller stones ( Ottoni & Mannu
2001; Mannu & Ottoni 2009; Canale et al. 2009). No doubt the
threshold body weight for effective percussive tool use (cracking)
varies in accord with properties of the food item. We consider it
likely that capuchins that were not very efﬁcient at cracking whole
nuts according to the measures we used in this study are more
efﬁcient at using stones as tools with food items that are less
resistant than whole piaçava nuts. Partially cracked piaçava nuts
meet this requirement, as we have seen.
Implications for Acquisition of Nut Cracking
Experiencing low efﬁciency does not seem to deter young
capuchins from attempting to crack whole nuts. But, there are other
circumstances in which young/small capuchins do experience better
efﬁciency, namely, when they attempt to crack partial nuts. Because
individuals frequently abandon or lose a section of a whole nut that
they have cracked, another capuchin may ﬁnd a partial nut and try to
crack it open. We suggest that the presence of partially cracked nuts
provided by the activity of others supports the juveniles’ abiding
interest in practicing nut cracking. Physical traces left at the anvil
(shells, stones, remains of nuts) also support juveniles’ interest in the
cracking site. In this sense, capuchins modify the environment
through their behaviour by leaving persistent artefacts that inﬂu-
ence the behaviour of conspeciﬁcs, an outcome called niche
construction (Odling-Smee et al. 2003). Persistent artefacts, coupled
with frequent social supports for manipulative activity that are tied
more closely in time to the adults’ activity (enhancement, facilita-
tion; Fragaszy & Visalberghi 2004; Gunst et al. 2008; da Silva 2008 ),
explains why young capuchins persist at cracking many food items,
including nuts, for years before succeeding routinely. In this sense,
nut cracking is likely to be a tradition: social context aids its acqui-
sition (Fragaszy & Perry 2003; da Silva 2008 ).
A similar system of combined immediate and temporally per-
sisting effects of conspeciﬁcs’ activity appears to inﬂuence young
brown capuchins’ ( C. apella ) attempts to locate beetle larvae
inhabiting tough bamboo canes ( Gunst et al. 2008 ). Adults’ actions
opening bamboo canes to ﬁnd beetle larvae enhanced infants and
juveniles’ interest in exploring these places and practising opening
bamboo canes for years before the juveniles could locate larvae
themselves. Physical traces of the adults’ activity in the bamboo
attracted infants and juveniles long after the adults left the area.
Thus, as in nut cracking, physical traces of adults’ activity provide
infants and juveniles with opportunities to experience part or all of
a difﬁcult foraging sequence in an easier version.
In current ecological theory, the costs and beneﬁts of activities
are measured at the level of the individual consumer (Stephens &
Krebs 1986 ). Yet, this study and others suggest that the niche
construction outcomes that result from the physical traces of
activity, including loss of nuts through displacements, impact the
ecology of capuchin groups in important ways. Similar processes
may be at work in other highly social genera in which socially
biased learning contributes substantively to the acquisition of
locally important behaviours, and in which enduring physical
traces are common outcomes of activity (e.g. New Caledonian
crows using forked trees to launch candle nuts onto a suitable stone
surface to crack them; Hunt et al. 2002 ).
In closing, we suggest that nut cracking as practised by bearded
capuchins is a striking example of behavioural plasticity; a behav-
ioural example of the ‘two-legged goat effect’, in West-Eberhard’s
(2003) phrase alluding to a well-known case of a goat born with no
front legs that walked bipedally. In populations where nut cracking
is a tradition, as is likely at our study site, we may look for
accommodation to this behaviour in many aspects of morphology
(associated with lifting and striking with heavy stones) and
behaviour
(e.g. bipedal stance and locomotion; exploratory actions;
attraction to physical traces) to understand the epigenetic process
that leads to its reliable appearance.
Acknowledgments
Our research protocol complied with all institutional guidelines
for the ethical participation of humans and nonhuman animals in
research. It was approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use
Committee (no. A2007-10178) and by the Institutional Review
Board (no. 2006-10469-1) at the University of Georgia. We thank
Stephen Fragaszy for participating as our cooperative human
model, Barth and Kristin Wright for commenting on the manu-
script, Jean-Baptiste Leca and Shane Furhman for assistance with
statistical analysis and Lindsey Eisenberg for data collection of
stone lift heights. This work was supported by grants from the
National Geographic Society, the National Science Foundation (BCS
350235), the National Council for Scientiﬁc and Technological
Development (Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientı´ ﬁco e
Tecnolo´ gico, or CNPq) of Brazil, the National Research Council
(Consiglio Nacionale delle Ricerche, or CNR) of Italy, and the
European project IM-CleVeR (FP7-ICT-IP-231722).
References
Altmann, J. & Alberts, S. 1987. Body mass and growth rates in a wild primate
population. Oecologia, 72, 15–20.
Altmann, S. A. 1998. Foraging for Survival: Yearling Baboons in Africa . Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Arau´ jo, A., Arruda, M., Alencar, A., Albuquerque, F., Nascimento, M. &
Yamamoto, M. 2000. Body weight of wild and captive common marmosets
(Callithrix jacchus ). International Journal of Primatology , 21, 317–324.
Beck, B. 1980. Animal Tool Behavior: the Use and Manufacture of Tools by Animals .
New York: Garland STPM Press.
Boesch, C. & Achermann-Boesch, H. 2000. The Chimpanzees of the Taı ¨ Forest.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Canale, G. R., Guidorizzi, C. E., Kierulff, M. C. M. & Gatto, C. A. F. R. 2009. First
record of tool use by wild populations of the yellow-breasted capuchin monkey
(Cebus xanthosternos ) and new records for the bearded capuchin ( Cebus libid-
inosus). American Journal of Primatology , 71, 366–372.
Chalk, J., Wright, B., Lucas, P., Verderane, M., Fragaszy, D., Visalberghi, E., Izar, P.
& Ottoni, E. 2008. The mechanical properties of foods processed by Cebus
libidinosus at Boa Vista, Brazil. American Journal of Physical Anthropology,
Supplement, 46,7 7 .
Cohen, P., Cohen, J., West, S. & Aiken, L. 2003. Applied Multiple Regression/Corre-
lation for the Behavioral Sciences , 3rd edn. Mahwah, New Jersey: L. Erlbaum.
Ford, S. & Davis, L. 1992. Systematics and body size: implications for feeding
adaptations in New World capuchins. American Journal of Physical Anthropology ,
88, 415–468.
Fragaszy, D. M. & Perry, S. 2003. Towards a biology of traditions. In: Traditions
in Nonhuman Animals: Models and Evidence (Ed. by D. M. Fragaszy & S. Perry),
pp. 1–32. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Fragaszy, D. M. & Visalberghi, E. 2004. Socially biased learning in capuchins.
Learning & Behaviour , 32, 24–35.
D. Fragaszy et al. / Animal Behaviour 79 (2010) 321–332 331

PDF PAGE 12
Fragaszy, D. M., Izar, P., Visalberghi, E., Ottoni, E. B. & de Oliveira, M. G. 2004a.
Wild capuchin monkeys (Cebus libidinosus) use anvils and stone pounding tools.
American Journal of Primatology , 64, 359–366.
Fragaszy, D. M., Visalberghi, E. & Fedigan, L. M. 2004b. The Complete Capuchin: the
Biology of the Genus Cebus . New York: Cambridge University Press.
Goodall, J. 1986. In the Shadow of Man . Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard
University Press.
Gunst, N., Boinski, S. & Fragaszy, D. 2008. Acquisition of foraging competence in
wild brown capuchins ( Cebus apella), with special reference to conspeciﬁcs’
foraging artefacts as an indirect social inﬂuence. Behaviour, 45, 195–229.
Haslam, M., Hernandez-Aguilar, A., Ling, V., Calvalho, S., de la Torre, I.,
DeStefano, A., Du, A., Hardy, B., Harris, J., Marchant, L., Matsuzawa, T.,
McGrew, W., Mercader, J., Mora, R., Petraglia, M., Roche, H., Visalberghi, E. &
Warren, R. 2009. Primate archaeology. Nature, 460, 339–344.
Hunt, G. R., Sakuma, F. & Shibata, Y. 2002. New Caledonian crows drop candle-
nuts onto rock from communally-used forks on branches. Emu, 102, 283–290.
Kortlandt, A. 1986. The use of tools by wild-living chimpanzees and earliest
hominids. Journal of Human Evolution , 15, 77–132.
Kortlandt, A. & Holzhaus, E. 1987. New data on the use of stone tools by chim-
panzees in Guinea and Liberia. Primates, 28, 473–496.
Liu, Q., Simpson, K., Izar, P., Ottoni, E., Visalberghi, E. & Fragaszy, D. 2009a.
Kinematics and energetics of nut-cracking in wild capuchin monkeys ( Cebus
libidinosus) in Piauı ´ , Brazil. American Journal of Physical Anthropology , 138,
210–220.
Liu, Q., Salvatori, A. M., Fragaszy, D., Izar, P., Ottoni, E. & Visalberghi, E. 2009b.
Longitudinal case study of nut-cracking in a juvenile bearded capuchin monkey
(Cebus libidinosus ): stand for success. American Journal of Primatology, Supple-
ment, 71,1 0 0 .
Mannu, M. & Ottoni, E. 2009. The enhanced tool-kit of two groups of wild bearded
capuchin monkeys in the Caatinga: tool making, associative use, and secondary
tools. American Journal of Physical Anthropology , 71, 242–251.
Moura, A. C. A. & Lee, P. C. 2004. Capuchin stone tool use in Caatinga dry forest.
Science, 306, 1909.
Odling-Smee, F. J., Laland, K. N. & Feldman, M. W. 2003. Niche Construction: the
Neglected Process in Evolution. Monographs in Population Biology 37 . Princeton,
New Jersey: Princeton University Press.
Oliveira, P. S. & Marquis, R. J. 2002. The
 Cerrados of Brazil: Ecology and Natural
History of a Neotropical Savanna. New York: Columbia University Press.
Ottoni, E. & Izar, P. 2008. Capuchin monkey tool use: overview and implications.
Evoutionary Anthropology, 17, 171–1 78.
Ottoni, E. & Mannu, M. 2001. Semi-free ranging tufted capuchins ( Cebus apella)
spontaneously use tools to crack open nuts. International Journal of Primatology ,
22, 347–358.
Pusey, A., Oehlert, G., Williams, J. & Goodall, J. 2005. Inﬂuence of ecological and
social factors on body mass of wild chimpanzees. International Journal of
Primatology, 26, 3–31.
Resende, B., Ottoni, E. B. & Fragaszy, D. 2008. Ontogeny of manipulative behavior
and nut-cracking in young capuchin monkeys ( Cebus apella): a perception-
action perspective. Developmental Science , 11, 828–840.
Sanz, C. & Morgan, D. 2007. Chimpanzee tool technology in the Goualougo
Triangle, Republic of Congo. Journal of Human Evolution , 52, 420–433.
da Silva, E. D. R. 2008. Escolha de alvos coespecı ´ ﬁcos na observaça ˜ o do uso de
ferramentas por macacos-prego ( Cebus libidinosus ) selvagens. M.Sc. thesis,
University of Sa˜ o Paulo.
Spagnoletti, N. 2009. Tool use in a wild population of Cebus libidinosus in Piauı´ ,
Brazil. Ph.D. thesis, University of Rome.
Stephens, J. & Krebs, D. 1986. Foraging Theory . Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton
University Press.
Sugiyama, Y. & Koman, J. 1979. Tool-using and -making behaviour in wild chim-
panzees at Bossou, Guinea. Primates, 20, 513–524.
Visalberghi, E., Fragaszy, D., Ottoni, E. B., Izar, P., Oliveira, P. S. & Andrade, F. R. D.
2007. Characteristics of hammer stones and anvils used by wild bearded
capuchin monkeys (Cebus libidinosus) to crack open palm nuts. American Journal
of Physical Anthropology , 132, 426–444.
Visalberghi, E., Sabbatini, G., Spagnoletti, N., Andrade, F., Ottoni, E., Izar, P. &
Fragaszy, D. 2008. Physical properties of palm fruits processed with tools by
wild bearded capuchins ( Cebus libidinosus). American Journal of Primatology , 70,
884–891.
Visalberghi, E., Addessi, E., Truppa, V., Spagnoletti, N., Ottoni, E., Izar, P. &
Fragaszy, D. 2009. Selection of effective stone tools by wild bearded capuchin
monkeys. Current Biology, 19, 2 13–217.
Waga, I. C., Dacier, A. K., Pinha, P. S. & Tavares, M. C. H. 2006. Spontaneous tool use
by wild capuchin monkeys ( Cebus libidinosus ) in the cerrado. Folia Primatolog-
ica, 77, 337–344.
Welch, B. L. 1947. The generalization of ‘student’s’ problem when several different
population variances are involved. Biometrika, 34, 28–35.
West-Eberhard, M. J. 2003. Developmental Plasticity and Evolution . New York:
Oxford University Press.
Wright, B., Wright, K., Chalk, J., Verderane, M., Fragaszy, D., Visalberghi, E.,
Izar, P., Ottoni, E., Constantino, P. & Vinyard, C. 2009. Fallback foraging as
a way of life: using dietary toughness to compare the fallback signal among
capuchins and implications for interpreting morphological variation. American
Journal of Physical Anthropology , 140, 687–699.
Yamakoshi, G. 1998. Dietary responses to fruit scarcity of wild chimpanzees at
Bossou, Guinea: possible implications for ecological importance of tool use.
American Journal of Physical Anthropology , 106, 283–295.
D. Fragaszy et al. / Animal Behaviour 79 (2010) 321–332332