PDF PAGE 1
Pr ovided for non-commer cial r esear ch and educational use.
Not for r epr oduction, distribution or commer cial use.
This article was originally published in the Encyclopedia of Evolutionary Biology published by Elsevier , and the
attached copy is provided by Elsevier for the author’s benefit and for the benefit of the author’s institution, for non-
commercial research and educational use including without limitation use in instruction at your institution, sending
it to specific colleagues who you know , and providing a copy to your institution’s administrator .
All other uses, reproduction and distribution, including without limitation commercial reprints, selling or licensing
copies or access, or posting on open internet sites, your personal or institution’s website or repository , are prohibited.
For exceptions, permission may be sought for such use through Elsevier’s permissions site at:
http://www .elsevier .com/locate/permissionusematerial
Svensson, E.I. (2016) Adaptive Landscapes. In: Kliman, R.M. (ed.), Encyclopedia of Evolutionary Biology. vol. 1,
pp. 9–15. Oxford: Academic Press.
© 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PDF PAGE 2
Adaptive Landscapes
EI Svensson, Lund University, Lund, Sweden
r 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Glossary
Adaptive landscape The relationship between ﬁtness
(dependent variable) and genotype (at one or several loci)
or phenotype. Different de ﬁnitions of adaptive landscapes
exist; the two most common being either ﬁtness depicted
against individual genotypes or ﬁtness depicted against
allele frequencies in the population.
Adaptive peak A gene or trait combination in the adaptive
landscape that is connected with high ﬁtness, and
tends to drive populations to evolve by natural or sexual
selection.
Brownian motion (BM) A popular and widely used
model of phenotypic evolution that is often used as a null
model or point of departure in phylogenetic comparative
studies of adaptation. In BM models, interspeci ﬁc variance
increases linearly over time, due to stochastic processes such
as mutation accumulation, and variance is thus unbounded.
Correlational selection Selection for optimal trait (or
gene) combinations, typically expected to operate around a
ﬁtness peak in a multidimensional adaptive landscape.
Epistasis Interactions between alleles at different loci in
shaping phenotypes. A special case, of particular relevance
to adaptive landscape theory is ﬁtness epistasis, where the
phenotype is ﬁtness which is interactively affected by two or
more loci, resulting in adaptive peaks or valleys. Fitness
epistasis is conceptually closely related to correlational
selection.
Fitness valley Combinations of genes or traits in between
adaptive peaks that result in low ﬁtness.
Holey adaptive landscape A special case of adaptive
landscapes initially modeled and suggested by theoretical
evolutionary biologist Sergey Gavrilets, where large regions
of genotype space form selectively neutral ‘ridges’ of high
ﬁtness, separated by low- ﬁtness genotypes. Genotypes are
assumed to only take two ﬁtness-values in this model
(1¼ ‘viable’ and 0 ¼ ‘unviable’). This model of adaptive
landscape has inspired researchers interested in the
dynamics of molecular evolution.
Ornstein–Uhlenbeck (OU) model An alternative model
of phenotypic evolution to Brownian motion in
phylogenetic comparative studies of adaptations. In contrast
to BM models, in OU models the accumulation of
interspeciﬁc variance is not unbounded, but constrained.
This re ﬂects the effects of a ‘pullback’ force in BM models,
which are usually interpreted as the effects of stabilizing
selection as populations and species climb alternate
adaptive peaks.
Peak shift The process by which a population moves from
one adaptive peak to another in the adaptive landscape, and
was traditionally thought to be dif ﬁcult or impossible, as
the population would have to cross a ﬁtness valley in
between the peaks.
Shifting Balance Theory (SBT) A controversial model of
evolution and the problem of peak shift that was initially
suggested by population geneticist Sewall Wright in 1932. It
invokes a delicate balance between different evolutionary
forces in subdivided populations such as genetic drift, local
selection, and gene ﬂow.
Stabilizing selection A conservative form of selection that
favors intermediate trait values or heterozygotes (as in
overdominant selection). Stabilizing selection is thought to
be a common mode of selection when populations are at
their evolutionary equilibria, such as when they are close to
their adaptive peaks.
Historical Introduction
A Central Position in Evolutionary Theory and Population
Genetics
Adaptive landscapes hold a central and special position in
evolutionary theory, particularly in population and quantita-
tive genetics, but also in some models of macroevolution. The
adaptive landscape concept was originally formulated by the
population geneticist Sewall Wright in his now classical paper
from 1932 entitled ‘The roles of mutation, inbreeding and
crossbreeding in evolution ’ (Wright, 1932 ; Figure 1 ). An
adaptive landscape shows the relationship between ﬁtness
(vertical axis) and one or several traits or genes (horizontal
axes). An adaptive landscape is therefore a form of response
surface, describing how dependent variable ( ﬁtness) is causally
inﬂuenced by one or several predictor variables (traits
or genes). Evolution by natural selection in the context of
adaptive landscapes can be viewed as a hill climbing process,
in which populations climb upwards to the trait or gene
combination with the highest ﬁtness ( ‘adaptive peaks ’). In
between the adaptive peaks, there are regions in phenotype or
genotype space of low ﬁtness ( ‘ﬁtness valleys ’). Adaptive
landscapes have appeared in the popular science literature on
evolutionary biology, perhaps most explicitly in Richard
Dawkin’s book ‘Climbing Mount Improbable, ’ published in
1996 ( Dawkins, 1996 ). Here, Dawkins, like many others,
likened evolution by natural selection to a hill climbing pro-
cess, in which populations and species evolved by climbing
the closest adaptive peak, even though it is not always the peak
with the highest overall ﬁtness.
In the precomputer era, adaptive landscapes were often
visualized as three-dimensional surface plots with only two
traits (or genes) as independent variables. Adaptive landscapes
then mainly served a heuristic function for qualitative
reasoning, rather than quantitative analysis. With the rapid
Encyclopedia of Evolutionary Biology, Volume 1 doi:10.1016/B978-0-12-800049-6.00054-8 9
Author's personal copy

PDF PAGE 3
development of evolutionary quantitative genetic theory and
increasing computer power, adaptive landscapes are now one
of several analytical tools for modern evolutionary biologists.
However, the adaptive landscape concept has also generated
many criticisms from both philosophers and evolutionary
biologists ( Kaplan, 2008 ; Svensson and Calsbeek, 2012 ).
Inﬂuence on Various Fields of Evolutionary Biology
Sewall Wright ’s main scienti ﬁc rival at the time when he for-
mulated the adaptive landscape concept was the British
mathematical population geneticist Ronald Fisher, who had a
different view of the evolutionary process ( Provine, 1986 ;
Frank and Slatkin, 1992 ). Frank and Slatkin (1992) discussed
the different views of Sewall Wright and Ronald Fisher, and
they argued that whereas Wright ’s goal was to establish a
dynamical theory of evolution, Fisher was more interested in
evolutionary equilibria, as re ﬂected in his formulation of the
‘Fundamental Theorem of Natural Selection ’, rather than being
interested in adaptive landscapes.
The paleontologist George Gaylord Simpson took the
adaptive landscape concept of Sewall Wright into the ﬁeld of
macroevolution of phenotypes, and also discussed so-called
quantum evolution – the rapid appearance of novel traits
and lineages often seen in fossil record ( Simpson, 1944 ;
Kirkpatrick, 1982 ). The adaptive landscape does still in ﬂuence
paleontological research, particularly those who try to interpret
stratigraphic time series in the fossil record ( Hunt, 2007 ;
Hunt et al ., 2008 ; Bell, 2012 ). Unlike Sewall Wright, Simpson
thus focused on quantitative phenotypic traits, regardless of
their genetic basis, which later in ﬂuenced evolutionary quan-
titative genetic theory ( Hansen, 1997 ; Arnold et al ., 2001 ). A
major step forward in evolutionary quantitative genetics was
achieved by modeling the temporal dynamics of Gaussian
phenotype distributions and how these distributions change
over time due to natural selection and genetic drift ( Lande,
1976). Arnold et al. (2001) argued that the adaptive landscape
provides a natural conceptual bridge between micro- and
macro-evolution. In ecology, the adaptive landscape metaphor
has perhaps been most in ﬂuential in the ﬁelds of adaptive
radiation and ecological speciation ( Schluter, 2000 ) and in
analyses of the evolutionary consequences of competition
(Fear and Price, 1998 ). The adaptive landscape has also been a
major inﬂuence in experimental evolution studies, particularly
in studies on microbes such as Escherichia coli (Lenski and
Travisano, 1994 ; Cooper, 2012 ).
Another ﬁeld where adaptive landscape theory has been
strongly in ﬂuential are phylogenetic comparative methods,
where models are now being developed to test various sce-
narios of phenotypic evolution and adaptive landscape
dynamics, including models for evolutionary stasis, peak
shifts, random bursts, and directional selection ( Uyeda and
Harmon, 2014 ). An important conceptual insight has been
that dynamics of phenotypic traits over evolutionary time
might sometimes better be described by an Ornstein –Uhlen-
beck (OU) process rather than by the traditional stochastic
Brownian motion (BM) model ( Hansen, 1997 ). OU models
are thought to capture stabilizing selection around adaptive
peaks better than BM models, as there is often a signature of a
signiﬁcant ‘pullback force ’ that is usually interpreted as the
signature of stabilizing selection ( Hansen, 1997 ).
There has recently been increasing interest in applying
adaptive landscape theory to problems in molecular evolution,
such as metabolic networks. One key insight that has stimulated
this interest is that multiple genotypes can give rise to the same
phenotype(s), implying that they can be more or less neutral
with respect to ﬁtness. Thus, there might be multiple genetic
solutions to the same ecological problem facing organisms
surviving in complex environments. In multidimensional gen-
otypes, there can often be a series of mutational steps con-
necting genotypes to each other, and populations can therefore
traverse extensively in genotype space on nearly-neutral ridges
(Gavrilets, 2004; Wagner, 2012). With the rapid development
of molecular biology and related ﬁelds, the adaptive landscape
has also recently emerged at the intersection between evolu-
tionary biology and systems biology (Kogenaru et al., 2009)a n d
has caught the attention of researchers interested in protein
evolution (Carneiro and Hartl, 2010 ).
Analytical Approaches and Methods of Study
There are ﬁve traditional major empirical approaches to study
adaptive landscapes:
1. Measuring and quantifying the mode of selection in nat-
ural populations
2. Experimental manipulations of individual genotypes,
phenotypic traits or agents of selection
3. Experimental evolution
4. Phylogenetic comparative methods
5. Inferences from time series in the fossil record.
All these methods have their pros and cons, and in-depth
reviews and discussions of each of the approaches can be
Figure 1 Sewall Wright ’s classical adaptive landscape ﬁgure. The
contour plots show various genetic combinations of high ﬁtness ( ‘ þ ’
in ﬁgure), separated by ﬁtness valleys ( ‘ /C0 ’ in ﬁgure). Sewall Wright
introduced the concept of the adaptive landscape in his 1932-
publication ( Wright, 1932 ). Reproduced from Skipper, R.A., Dietrich,
D., 2012. Sewall Wright's Adaptive Landscape: Philosophical
reﬂections on heuristic value. In: Svensson, E.I., Calsbeek, R., (Eds.),
The Adaptive Landscape in Evolutionary Biology, Oxford: Oxford
University Press, pp. 16 –25, with permission from original publisher.
10 Adaptive Landscapes
Author's personal copy

PDF PAGE 4
found elsewhere ( Endler, 1986; Harvey and Pagel, 1991 ; Rose
and Lauder, 1996 ). Methods 1, 4, and 5 are correlative
approaches and are inferential, whereas methods 2 and 3
manipulate either phenotypes, selective environments, or both.
The analysis and visualization of adaptive landscapes and
ﬁtness surfaces have become increasingly sophisticated with
the development of multivariate statistical techniques. Today,
evolutionary biologists can describe ﬁtness surfaces both in
terms of elevation and curvature and have developed a rigor-
ous formal mathematical framework to quantify adaptive
peaks and ﬁtness valleys as well as interactions between traits
(‘correlational selection ’) and how they affect ﬁtness ( Arnold
et al ., 2001 ; Sinervo and Svensson, 2002 ; Blows, 2007 ). The
development of multivariate statistical methods to analyze
ﬁtness surfaces now means that evolutionary biologists are no
longer constrained about thinking about adaptive landscapes
in only three dimensions, which has been a frequent criticism
of adaptive landscapes ( Kaplan, 2008 ). The parameters that
are used to quantify ﬁtness surfaces include directional selec-
tion gradients ( β), curvilinear, and correlational selection
gradients (Phillips and Arnold, 1989 ). Fitness is then modeled
as response surface, which is depicted against one or several
underlying phenotypic traits (predictor variables).
Different Versions of Adaptive Landscapes
Landscape Structure
Several different types of adaptive landscapes have been
developed since Wright (1932) , and evolution on these will
follow very different dynamics ( Skipper and Dietrich, 2012 ;
Figure 2). ‘Wrightian adaptive landscapes’ are characterized by
multiple adaptive peaks, and ﬁtness valleys in between them,
reﬂecting the ﬁtness epistasis that is expected from strong gene
interactions. ‘Fisherian adaptive landscapes’ are smoother than
their Wrightian counterparts, and are characterized by a single
adaptive peak toward which the population moves through the
action of mass selection in large and panmictic populations. In
contrast, in the ‘rugged adaptive landscapes ’ envisioned by
Wright, populations get stuck on local adaptive peaks for a very
long time, being unable to move across ﬁtness valleys. In ‘holey
adaptive landscapes,’ evolution can easily proceed along neutral
or semi-neutral ridges that connect genotypes of approximately
equal ﬁtness to each other throughout genotype space.
The target model of adaptation is an application of
adaptive landscape theory that was initially proposed by Fisher
(1930), and formally modeled by Orr (1998) to understand
P ′
0
(a) (c)
(b) (d)
0 Frequency of Ballele
1
1
1
1
1
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.6
Wbar
0.6
0.6
0.4
0.4 0.4
P1
P2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0
0
Genotype spaceGenotype space
Mean population
fitness (w)
Fitness
Fitness
Frequency of A allele
Figure 2 Four different adaptive landscape versions that have grown out from various critiques of Sewall Wright ’s original adaptive landscape. (a)
‘Fisherian’ adaptive landscape with a single ﬁtness peak. (b) ‘Holey adaptive landscape ’, where genotypes can either have high or low ﬁtness, as
formulated by Gavrilets (2004) . (c) ‘Wrightian’ adaptive landscape with two ﬁtness peaks. (d) ‘Rugged adaptive landscape. ’ Reproduced Skipper, R.
A., Dietrich, D., 2012. Sewall Wright's Adaptive Landscape: Philosophical re ﬂections on heuristic value. In: Svensson, E.I., Calsbeek, R., (Eds.), The
Adaptive Landscape in Evolutionary Biology, Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 16 –25, with permission from original publisher.
Adaptive Landscapes 11
Author's personal copy

PDF PAGE 5
the genetic architecture of the process of adaptation by natural
selection toward a ﬁxed optimum. The target model predicts
an exponential size distribution of the ﬁxed factors involved in
adaptation, with genes of large effects typically ﬁxed ﬁrst,
followed by genes of smaller effects as the population
approaches the optimum ( Orr, 1998 ). The underlying reason
for this sequence of events leading to the ﬁxation of factors of
differing size is that early on in the population history, genes
of major effect are more likely to push the population closer to
the ﬁtness optimum, but as the optimum is approached, large-
effect mutations are more likely to lead to ‘overshoot’ of the
optimum and hence decrease ﬁtness (Fisher, 1930; Orr, 1998).
Landscape Dynamics
Natural and sexual selection often ﬂuctuate strongly in natural
populations when measured across different years or genera-
tions. These ﬂuctuating selection pressures strongly suggest that
adaptive peaks and valleys are not stable on microevolutionary
timescales (Calsbeek et al., 2012). Moreover, adaptive peaks and
ﬁtness valleys are expected to be even less stable on macro-
evolutionary timescales, due to major climatic and biotic
changes ( Hansen, 2012 ). The ecological causes and evolu-
tionary consequences of such landscape dynamics are largely
unknown and are subject to much discussion among evolu-
tionary biologists. A distinction can thus be made between
‘static’ and ‘dynamic’ adaptive landscapes. Major changes in the
environment, such as the movement into new ‘adaptive zones’
are generally considered to be the major explanation for peak
movements on macroevolutionary timescales, as envisioned by
Simpson (Simpson, 1944; Hansen, 1997; Arnold et al., 2001).
On microevolutionary timescales, density- and frequency-
dependent selection have attracted special interest as mechan-
isms causing landscape dynamics and the movement
of adaptive peaks. For instance, under negative frequency-
dependent selection (NFDS), a rare morph or genotype will
experience high ﬁtness because of its low frequency, but this
ﬁtness advantage will disappear as it increases in frequency and
climbs the closest adaptive peak. Therefore, a ﬁtness peak will
become a ﬁtness trough, over time and a ﬁtness trough will turn
into a ﬁtness peak across generations, as the genetic composition
of the population changes. The adaptive landscape will therefore
be more similar to an ‘ocean’ with moving waves than a static
mountain range. Other ecological interactions and processes
such as coevolutionary arms races and ‘Red Queen ’-dynamics
can generate similar effects, and Fisher emphasized this aspect
of the evolutionary process in his ‘Fundamental Theorem of
Natural Selection’ (Frank and Slatkin, 1992 ). Therefore, under
NFDS and in similar ecological scenarios, population mean
ﬁtness will not necessarily increase, even though the ﬁtness
of some genotypes do increase, which points to the crucial
distinction between the ﬁtness surface of individuals and the
mean ﬁtness of the population ( Fear and Price, 1998 ).
Controversies and Criticisms
The Problem of Dimensionality
One misunderstanding by less mathematically inclined phi-
losophers and historians of science is the frequently repeated
claim that adaptive landscapes are only meaningful in three
dimensions and that they cease to exist or are meaningless in
higher dimensions ( Provine, 1986). This early criticism against
the adaptive landscape essentially states that since organisms
and genotypes are multidimensional, and cannot be restricted
to two traits, the adaptive landscape should be abandoned and
be replaced with ‘formal modeling ’ (Kaplan, 2008 ). However,
this criticism misses the fact that the phenotypic adaptive
landscape in the tradition of evolutionary quantitative genetics
does have a rigorous mathematical framework in the form of
the visualization of both ﬁtness surfaces through the estima-
tion of parameters quantifying the steepness and curvature of
adaptive peaks and valleys ( Arnold et al., 2001). This statistical
framework is not restricted to only two traits and constitutes
exactly the kind of formal modeling that has been requested
by critics of the adaptive landscape. With the development of
multivariate statistical tools from matrix algebra, such as
canonical analysis (CA) and diagonalization techniques, it is
now possible to model ﬁtness surfaces in more than three
dimensions and to investigate multiple traits simultaneously
(Blows and Brooks, 2003 ). The frequently reiterated criticisms
against the simpli ﬁed three-dimensional ﬁtness surfaces by
Sewall Wright ( Kaplan, 2008 ) are therefore no longer valid as
modern mathematical, statistical, and computational tools
are now regularly used to explore surfaces of increasing
dimensionality, both at the phenotypic and genotypic levels
(Gavrilets, 2004 ; Blows, 2007 ).
Fitness of Individual Genotypes or Allele Frequencies of the
Population?
Provine, who published an early and in ﬂuential in-depth
biography of Sewall Wright ( Provine, 1986 ), criticized the
adaptive landscape metaphor and pointed to inconsistencies
of the two different versions of the adaptive landscape: the
genotypic version versus the one showing population allele
frequencies. Provine argued these two versions of the adaptive
landscape suggested by Wright were ‘wholly incompatible, ’
and that it was only the adaptive landscape of the population
allele frequencies that was meaningful. Provine further argued
that the adaptive landscape of individual genotypes should be
abandoned, as there was no natural way of arranging the
discrete genotypes on the axes and essentially this version was
meaningless. However, Gavrilets (2004) criticized Provine ’s
view and showed that information about the ﬁtnesses of
individual genotypes could be used to deduce ﬁtness land-
scapes at the population level (but not the other way around).
Gavrilets therefore questioned the claim by Provine that these
two types of adaptive landscapes were wholly incompatible as
they instead are quite naturally connected through each other,
as the population mean ﬁtness is obviously in ﬂuenced by
individual ﬁtnesses, but it is not necessarily the other way
around ( Fear and Price, 1998 ; Svensson and Calsbeek, 2012 ).
The adaptive landscape of individual genotypes and the
adaptive landscape of allele frequencies of the population
have in ﬂuenced different sub ﬁelds of evolutionary biology.
The adaptive landscape of gene combinations has been parti-
cularly important in evolutionary genetics and the under-
standing of ﬁtness epistasis ( Wolf et al ., 2000 ; Phillips, 2008 )
and in speciation theory, particularly postzygotic speciation
12 Adaptive Landscapes
Author's personal copy

PDF PAGE 6
and the development of hybrid incompatibility. In contrast,
the adaptive landscape of allele frequencies has played a more
prominent role in quantitative genetics and the evolution of
phenotypic traits.
The Debate Over the Shifting Balance Theory
Considerable controversy and debate has been focused on the
problem of peak shifts and the crossing of ﬁtness valleys in the
adaptive landscape. Sewall Wright ’s suggested solution to the
problem of peak shifts and the dilemma for a population that
has to traverse through a valley of low ﬁtness was outlined in
his Shifting Balance Theory (SBT) of evolution ( Wright, 1932 ;
Figure 1 ). Wright argued that in large panmictic populations,
peak shifts were unlikely to happen, as mass selection would
predominate and the role of genetic drift would be negligible.
At the other extreme, in very small populations, genetic drift is
stronger and such small populations would potentially go
extinct at a high rate. However, in populations of intermediate
size that are connected through moderate gene ﬂow, genetic
drift could interact with local selection and shape evolutionary
outcomes in a different way than would selection operating
alone ( Wade and Goodnight, 1998 ). Wright envisioned this
ecological setting to be most favorable for peak shifts. SBT,
since it was ﬁrst suggested, has been subject to considerable
controversy. For a critical perspective on SBT, where the
authors argue it is unlikely to be important in adaptive evo-
lution, see Coyne et al. (1997, 2000). For a defense of SBT and
Wright’s view of peak shifts, see Wade and Goodnight (1998)
and Goodnight and Wade (2000) . The different views
expressed by these different authors illustrate a still existing
and strong division between different branches of population
genetics, relying either on Sewall Wright ’s or Fisher ’s modeling
traditions ( Provine, 1986 ; Frank and Slatkin, 1992 ).
Mathematical Models of Peak Shifts
Several other mathematical models of how peak shifts could
happen have been developed. Among these models is the
insight that peak shifts could more easily happen when
environments ﬂuctuate, so that ﬁtness valleys may temporarily
disappear ( Whitlock, 1997 ). Peak shifts can also happen for
purely intrinsic reasons, without any environmental change,
through increased genetic variance from inbreeding or devel-
opmental noise ( Kirkpatrick, 1982 ; Whitlock, 1995 ). Pheno-
typic plasticity and subsequent genetic accommodation have
also been shown to be able to bring population closer to the
domain of attraction of a new adaptive peak ( Price et al .,
2003).
Peak shifts could also result from correlated responses to
selection, if phenotypic traits are genetically correlated with
each other, as they typically are ( Price et al ., 1993 ). Genetic
drift alone has also been shown to be able to cause peak shifts,
although the effective population size ( Ne) has to become
extremely low for this to plausibly happen ( Lande, 1985 ).
Finally, the adaptive landscape of the population is in ﬂuenced
by both the relative ﬁtness of different phenotypes and their
relative frequency ( Kirkpatrick, 1982 ). As a consequence,
the adaptive landscape will ‘ﬂatten out ’ compared to the
individual ﬁtness surface, making ﬁtness valleys shallower and
potentially easier to cross than one would get the impression
of if one only looks at individual ﬁtness surfaces ( Fear and
Price, 1998 ). Taken together, these different models have
shown that the problem of peak shifts might not be as severe
as originally thought, and peak shifts can happen through
several different mechanisms. The plausibility of each of these
different scenarios is mainly a remaining empirical issue.
Adaptive Ridges and the Non-Existing Problem of Peak
Shifts
An alternative perspective on the peak shift debate is that
peaks might not exist in real (multidimensional) adaptive
landscapes, because all such real adaptive landscapes are likely
to have at least one ridge of high ﬁtness between different
peaks ( Gavrilets, 2004 ). The increasing number of ridges with
increasing dimensionality of the adaptive landscape leads to
something which has been coined the ‘extradimensional
bypass,’ relative to the situation for three-dimensional adap-
tive landscapes ( Gavrilets, 2004 ). This view, therefore, does
not deny the existence of the adaptive landscape, as did some
early critics of adaptive landscapes, but, according to this view,
there will exist large selectively neutral or nearly neutral
regions in genotype space that can connect genotypes of
approximately equal ﬁtness to each other through networks.
Thus, it is therefore the structure of the adaptive landscape,
rather than its existence, that is the focus of this and other
models of ‘holey adaptive landscapes ’ (Gavrilets, 2004 ). In
these models, the problem of peak shifts therefore disappears,
as populations are expected to easily traverse on these adaptive
ridges throughout more or less the entire genotype space.
Conclusions and Future Outlook
The adaptive landscape has stimulated a lot of empirical and
theoretical research in various sub ﬁelds of evolutionary
biology, including evolutionary and population genetics,
quantitative genetics, evolutionary ecology, macroevolution,
paleontology, and speciation, to only mention a few such
areas. The adaptive landscape has therefore been a very useful
concept to evolutionary biologists, judged by the number of
investigations and articles that has been published and which
are anchored in the adaptive landscape tradition. It is even
questionable if certain research ﬁelds would have existed at all
if the adaptive landscape concept had not been formulated
by Wright. These ﬁelds include experimental evolution, evo-
lutionary quantitative genetics, and certain branches and
models of phylogenetic comparative methods. Judged by this
enormous interest, the adaptive landscape must surely be one
of the most successful concepts in evolutionary biology.
However, the adaptive landscape has also generated con-
siderable controversy and criticisms, resulting in debates of
which some have now been settled, whereas others still remain
unsolved. Whether these debates have been useful to evolu-
tionary biology or a waste of time is probably a matter
of different opinion among different researchers. However,
the adaptive landscape is likely to remain in the center of
Adaptive Landscapes 13
Author's personal copy

PDF PAGE 7
evolutionary biology for decades to come, and there are signs
that it is now attracting the interest of evolutionary biologists
working on molecular evolution. Hopefully, future genera-
tions of evolutionary biologists can learn from these debates
and avoid repeating misunderstandings and past mistakes
about adaptive landscapes.
See also : Adaptation, History of. Coevolutionary Fitness
Landscapes. Divergence and Diversi ﬁcation, Quantitative Genetics
of. Ecological Speciation and Its Consequences. Evolutionary
Biology, History of. Evolvability, Quantitative Genetics of. Founder
Speciation. Gene Interactions in Evolution. Genotype to Phenotype:
Insights from Evo-Devo. Macroevolution, Quantitative Genetics and.
Natural Selection, Introduction to. Natural Selection, Measuring.
Quantitative Genetic Variation
References
Arnold, S.J., Pfrender, M.E., Jones, A.G., 2001. The Adaptive Landscape as a
conceptual bridge between micro- and macroevolution. Genetica 112 −113, 9 –32.
Bell, M.A., 2012. Adaptive Landscapes, evolution and the fossil record. In:
Svensson, E.I., Calsbeek, R. (Eds.), The Adaptive Landscape in Evolutionary
Biology. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Blows, M.W., 2007. A tale of two matrices: Multivariate approaches in evolutionary
biology. Journal of Evolutionary Biology 20, 1 –8.
Blows, M.W., Brooks, R., 2003. Measuring nonlinear selection. American Naturalist
162, 815 –820.
Calsbeek, R., Gosden, T.P., Kuchta, S.R., Svensson, E.I., 2012. Fluctuating selection
and dynamic Adaptive Landscapes. In: Svensson, E.I., Calsbeek, R. (Eds.), The
Adaptive Landscape in Evolutionary Biology. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Carneiro, M., Hartl, D.L., 2010. Colloquium papers: Adaptive Landscapes and
protein evolution. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America 107 (Suppl. 1), 1747 –1751.
Cooper, T.F., 2012. Empirical insights into adaptive landscapes from bacterial
experimental evolution. In: Svensson, E.I., Calsbeek, R. (Eds.), The Adaptive
Landscape in Evolutionary Biology. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 169 –179.
Coyne, J.A., Barton, N.H., Turelli, M., 1997. Perspective: A critique of of Sewall
Wright's shifting balance theory of evolution. Evolution 51, 643 –671.
Coyne, J.A., Barton, N.H., Turelli, M., 2000. Is Wright's shifting balance process
important in evolution? Evolution 54, 306 –317.
Dawkins, R., 1996. Climbing Mount Improbable. New York: Norton.
Endler, J.A., 1986. Natural Selection in the Wild. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Fear, K., Price, T., 1998. The adaptive surface in ecology. Oikos 82, 440 –448.
Fisher, R.A., 1930. The Genetical Theory of Natural Selection. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Frank, S.A., Slatkin, M., 1992. Fisher's fundamental theorem of natural selection.
Trends in Ecology and Evolution 7, 92 –95.
Gavrilets, S., 2004. Fitness Landscapes and the Origin of Species. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Goodnight, C.J., Wade, M.J., 2000. The ongoing synthesis: A reply to Coyne,
Barton and Turelli. Evolution 54, 317 –324.
Hansen, T.F., 1997. Stabilizing selection and the comparative analysis of adaptation.
Evolution 51, 1341 –1351.
Hansen, T.F., 2012. Adaptive Landscapes and macroevolutionary dynamics. In:
Svensson, E.I., Calsbeek, R. (Eds.), The Adaptive Landscape in Evolutionary
Biology. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Harvey, P.H., Pagel, M.D., 1991. The Comparative Method in Evolutionary Biology.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hunt, G., 2007. The relative importance of directional change, random walks, and
stasis in the evolution of fossil lineages. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America 104, 18404 –18408.
Hunt, G., Bell, M.A., Travis, M.P., 2008. Evolution toward a new adaptive optimum:
phenotypic evolution in a fossil stickleback lineage. Evolution 62, 700 –710.
Kaplan, J., 2008. The end of the adaptive landscape metaphor? Biology &
Philosophy 23, 625 –638.
Kirkpatrick, M., 1982. Quantum evolution and punctuated equilibria in continous
genetic characters. American Naturalist 119, 833 –848.
Kogenaru, M., de Vos, M.G., Tans, S.J., 2009. Revealing evolutionary pathways by
ﬁtness landscape reconstruction. Critical Reviews in Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology 44, 169 –174.
Lande, R., 1976. Natural selection and random genetic drift in phenotypic evolution.
Evolution 30, 314 –334.
Lande, R., 1985. Expected time for random genetic drift of a population between
stable phenotypic states. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America 82, 7641 –7645.
Lenski, R.E., Travisano, M., 1994. Dynamics of adaptation and diversi ﬁcation: A
10 000-generation experiment with bacterial populations. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of United States of America 91, 6808 –6814.
Orr, H.A., 1998. The population genetics of adaptation: The distribution of factors
ﬁxed during adaptive evolution. Evolution 52, 935 –949.
Phillips, P.C., 2008. Epistasis − the essential role of gene interactions in the
structure and evolution of genetic systems. Nature Reviews Genetics 9, 855 –867.
Phillips, P.C., Arnold, S.J., 1989. Visualizing multivariate selection. Evolution 43,
1209–1266.
Price, T., Turelli, M., Slatkin, M., 1993. Peak shifts produced by correlated response
to selection. Evolution 47, 280 –290.
Price, T.D., Qvarnstrom, A., Irwin, D.E., 2003. The role of phenotypic plasticity in
driving genetic evolution. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London Series
B-Biological Sciences 270, 1433 –1440.
Provine, W.B., 1986. Sewall Wright and Evolutionary Biology. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Rose, M.R., Lauder, G.V., 1996. Adaptation. San Diego: Academic Press.
Schluter, D., 2000. The Ecology of Adaptive Radiation. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Simpson, G.G., 1944. Tempo and Mode in Evolution. New York: Columbia
University Press.
Sinervo, B., Svensson, E., 2002. Correlational selection and the evolution of
genomic architecture. Heredity 16, 948 –955.
Skipper, R.A., Dietrich, D., 2012. Sewall Wright's Adaptive Landscape: Philosophical
reﬂections on heuristic value. In: Svensson, E.I., Calsbeek, R. (Eds.), The
Adaptive Landscape in Evolutionary Biology. Oxford: Oxford University Press,
pp. 16 –25.
Svensson, E.I., Calsbeek, R.E., 2012. The Adaptive Landscape in Evolutionary
Biology. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Uyeda, J.C., Harmon, L.J., 2014. A novel Bayesian method for inferring and
interpreting the dynamics of adaptive landscapes from phylogenetic comparative
data. Systematic Biology 63, 902 –918.
Wade, M.J., Goodnight, C.J., 1998. The theories of Fisher and Wright in the context
of metapopulations: When nature does many small experiments. Evolution 52,
1537–1553.
Wagner, A., 2012. High-dimensional Adaptive Landscapes facilitate evolutionary
innovation. In: Svensson, E.I., Calsbeek, R. (Eds.), The Adaptive Landscape in
Evolutionary Biology. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Whitlock, M.C., 1995. Variance-induced peak shifts. Evolution 49, 252 –259.
Whitlock, M.C., 1997. Founder effects and peak shifts without genetic drift: Adaptive
peak shifts occur easily when environments ﬂuctuate slightly. Evolution 51,
1044–1048.
Wolf, J.B., Brodie III, E.D., Wade, M.J., 2000. Epistasis and the Evolutionary
Process. New York: Oxford University Press.
Wright, S., 1932. The roles of mutation, inbreeding, crossbreeding and selection in
evolution. Proceedings of the Sixth International Congress of Genetics 1,
356–366.
Further Reading
Arnold, S.J., Pfrender, M.E., Jones, A.G., 2001. The Adaptive Landscape as a
conceptual bridge between micro- and macroevolution. Genetica 112 −113,
9–32.
Carneiro, M., Hartl, D.L., 2010. Colloquium papers: Adaptive Landscapes and
protein evolution. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America 107 (Suppl. 1), 1747 –1751.
Dawkins, R., 1996. Climbing Mount Improbable. New York: Norton.
Fear, K., Price, T., 1998. The adaptive surface in ecology. Oikos 82, 440 –448.
Frank, S.A., Slatkin, M., 1992. Fisher's fundamental theorem of natural selection.
Trends in Ecology and Evolution 7, 92 –95.
14 Adaptive Landscapes
Author's personal copy

PDF PAGE 8
Gavrilets, S., 2004. Fitness Landscapes and the Origin of Species. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Uyeda, J.C., Harmon, L.J., 2014. A novel Bayesian method for inferring and
interpreting the dynamics of adaptive landscapes from phylogenetic comparative
data. Systematic Biology 63, 902 –918.
Wolf, J.B., Brodie III, E.D., Wade, M.J., 2000. Epistasis and the Evolutionary
Process. New York: Oxford University Press.
Wright, S., 1932. The roles of mutation, inbreeding, crossbreeding and selection
in evolution. Proceedings of the Sixth International Congress of Genetics 1,
356–366.
Relevant Websites
http://beacon-center.org/blog/2012/10/08/evolution-101-ﬁtness-landscapes/
BEACON.
http://pleiotropy.ﬁeldofscience.com/2012/07/crossing-valleys-in-ﬁtness-landscapes.
html
Pleiotropy.
http://news.ucdavis.edu/search/news_detail.lasso?id=10451
UCDavis.
http://evolution.berkeley.edu/evolibrary/article/evo_53
University of California Museum of Paleontology.
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:
Visualization_of_a_population_evolving_in_a_dynamic_ﬁtness_landscape.gif
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fitness_landscape#mediaviewer/File:
Visualization_of_a_population_evolving_in_a_static_ﬁtness_landscape.gif
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4pdiAneMMhU
Adaptive Landscapes 15
Author's personal copy