PDF PAGE 1
Journal of Comparative Psychology
1989, Vol. 103. No. 2. 159-170
Copyright 1989 by the American Psychological Association. Inc.
0735-7036/89/$00.75
Social Influences on the Acquisition of Tool-Using Behaviors
in Tufted Capuchin Monkeys (Cebus apella)
Dorothy M. Fragaszy
Department of Psychology and
Department of Veterinary and Comparative
Anatomy, Pharmacology, and Physiology
Washington State University
Elisabetta VisalberghiIstituto di Psicologia, Consiglio Nazionale
delle Ricerche, Roma, Italy
To identify behaviors related to acquisition of tool-use in tufted capuchins (Cebus apella), we
presented two tool-using tasks to two groups, extending findings by Westergaard and Fragaszy
(1987) and Visalberghi (in press). Five Ss learned to use the tools in each task. The primary
predictor of success was level of interest in the task. Observation of others at the apparatus did
not facilitate exploratory behaviors or contact with the tools in the observers. Most animals
performed exploratory behaviors more often when they were at the apparatus alone than when
with another, whether or not the other was using a tool. Observers were quick to learn the
relationship between another's activities and the appearance of food. We conclude that capuchins
do not readily learn about instrumental relations by observation of others or imitate other's acts.
Imitation probably plays no role in the spread of novel instrumental behaviors among monkeys.
Learning through observation of others has long been sug-
gested as a means by which behaviors can spread among
members of social species. Support for this hypothesis comes
from studies of song learning in birds (Payne, 1987), feeding
actions in pigeons (Palameta & LeFebvre, 1987) and, perhaps,
in finches (Werner & Sherry, 1987), and feeding techniques
in rats (Gandolfi & Parisi, 1973; see Galef, 1988, for a review
and Zentall & Galef, 1988, for recent treatments). Animals
also acquire affective responses after observation of others
(fear in monkeys: Cook, Mineka, Wolkenstein, & Laitsch,
1985; mobbing in birds: Curio, Ernst, & Vieth, 1978; food
aversions in rats: Galef, 1977; Galef & Clarke, 1971; see
Zentall & Galef, 1988). Several studies with nonhuman pri-
mates have used discrimination learning problems; they have
demonstrated a benefit to the observer from watching a model
in the rapidity with which a visual discrimination is learned
(Darby & Riopelle, 1959; Mahan & Rumbaugh, 1963; Wech-
klin, 1970). Beck (1976) reported that watching a model
enhanced acquisition of a tool-using behavior in pigtailed
macaques. Instrumental behaviors, particularly in chimpan-
This research was supported by Grant 8503603 from the National
Science Foundation, by Grant MHRO1-41543 from the Public Health
Service, and by a Research Scientist Development Award from the
National Institute of Mental Health to Dorothy M. Fragaszy and by
a Bilateral Italy-USA Grant to Elisabetta Visalberghi from the Con-
siglio Nazionale delle Ricerche.
We thank W. London of the National Institutes of Health for the
loan of several of the animals in the breeding colony. E. Seaman, S.
Schwartz, M. Smith, G. Mathers, and H. Johnson assisted in the
observations, and R. Carlson and L. Trinca, with the analysis of data.
We thank L. Adams-Curtis and N. Munkenbeck for comments on
earlier drafts of this article.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to
Dorothy M. Fragaszy, Department of Psychology, Washington State
University, Pullman, Washington 99164-4830.
zees, have been singled out as likely to have spread within
groups by observational influence (see Nishida, 1986, for a
review). To a large extent, however, the data do not support
the notion that imitation, as direct repetition of a novel
behavior or observational learning of a relation between a
behavior and an outcome, occurs frequently in nonhumans
(e.g., Chamove, 1974; Kellogg & Kellogg, 1933; Visalberghi
& Fragaszy, in press). In many cases in which imitation has
been inferred, alternative explanations that involve direct
experience or social influence in other forms are equally
plausible (e.g., food washing in monkeys; Galef 1987; Visal-
berghi & Fragaszy, 1988). The final outcome (spread of a
behavior in a group) can arise in several different ways.
We can readily identify four different forms of social influ-
ence on an animals's performance of a behavior in the pres-
ence of others. First, the presence or behavior of other indi-
viduals can influence the general level of activity but does not
differentially increase a specific behavior or interest in a
particular object. Second, other animals' activity in a partic-
ular place can enhance interest (expressed in different ways)
in that place (local enhancement). Third, other animals' ac-
tivity can differentially facilitate or inhibit the expression of
certain behaviors (not necessarily the same behaviors that the
others are performing) already in the observer's repertoire
(social facilitation or inhibition). Finally, other animals' activ-
ity can lead to the production of novel behaviors or a novel
sequence of behaviors in the observer. Only the last is imita-
tion. As did Bandura (1986), we reserve the term observational
learning for the learning of a relational rule by observation,
as for example, oddity, seriation, or the spatial relationship
necessary between tool and target.
One approach to the problem of distinguishing among the
several forms of social influence on the spread of novel
behaviors is to present tasks that constrain the form that the
novel behavior takes. It is important that social facilitation
159
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
All rights, including for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies, are reserved.

PDF PAGE 2
160 DOROTHY M. FRAGASZY AND ELISABETTA VISALBERGHI
and local enhancement be distinguishable from imitation or
observational learning (Galef, 1988). Tool-using tasks and
sequential tasks are useful for this purpose because successful
performance that results from a generalized increase in activ-
ity, local enhancement, or social facilitation is improbable.
Recent, systematic studies have shown that tufted capuchin
monkeys can spontaneously learn to use tools in several
situations (Visalberghi, in press; Westergaard & Fragaszy,
1987), confirming earlier studies of acquisition with single
subjects (Antinucci & Visalberghi, 1986; Bierens de Haan,
1931; Harlow, 1951; Kluver, 1933) and observations, again
of single subjects, in which the acquisition of the behavior
was not studied (Boinski, 1988; Cooper & Harlow, 1961;
Darwin, 1794; Romanes, 1883; Vevers & Weiner, 1963).
However, these recent studies with groups of capuchins have
also shown that not all animals in a group acquire tool-using
behaviors and that acquisition of tool-using behaviors can
follow different schedules in different individuals (Visalberghi,
in press; Westergaard & Fragaszy, 1987). These findings raise
two questions: (a) What distinguishes animals that learn to
use tools in a given problem from those that do not? and (b)
Does observation of a skilled model contribute to acquisition
in some animals, and if so, in what manner? The studies
reported in this article focused on these two questions.
Very little is known about the sources of individual differ-
ences in the likelihood of discovering an innovative behavior
or about the processes that support such a discovery (Box &
Fragaszy, 1986). Although insight into innovative behavior in
nonhumans has traditionally come from serendipitous obser-
vations (e.g., Hamilton, Buskirk, & Buskirk, 1978, who ob-
served fishing in wild baboons), systematic attempts to elicit
innovations need also to be undertaken. Instrumental tasks
presented to captive subjects in their living area are useful for
this purpose. Recent studies with chimpanzees and with cap-
uchins have adopted this procedure (Adams-Curtis & Fra-
gaszy, 1988; Tomasello, Davis-Dasilva, Camak, & Bard,
1987).
We monitored the behavior toward two novel tool-using
tasks in groups of capuchin monkeys; our aims were to
evaluate the differences between innovators and others and
to assess the importance of the various types of social influence
on acquisition of novel behaviors.
Method
Design
Two experiments were performed in which an apparatus that
required the use of a tool to obtain food was placed into the monkeys'
home cage for a 30-min period each test day. In Experiment 1,
walnuts in the shell were in the apparatus; metal objects suitable for
pounding were available. In Experiment 2, a type of "vending ma-
chine" that dispensed sunflower seeds could be activated by an
animal's moving an internal slider mounted inside a long tube with
a rod. Observations were made with a combination of one-zero and
instantaneous sampling for activity at the apparatus by each subject
in 10-s intervals. Twenty sessions were completed per group in
Experiment 1, and 30, in Experiment 2. Experiment 1 took place
over 4 months; Experiment 2 took place over 6 months. After the
completion of regular sessions in Experiment 2, four additional
sessions with the second task were done after the removal of the 1
monkey in Group 2 that knew how to use the tool; six sessions were
also held in each group with the provision of several loose tools in
place of the single tool that had been provided previously.
Subjects
Members of two established groups (20 animals that ranged in age
from 8 months to >26 years; see Table 1) of tufted capuchins (Cebus
ape/la) participated in the experiments. Each group was near the
norm for the species in terms of size and age-sex composition (e.g.,
Terborgh, 1983).
Each group of monkeys was housed in a two-room cage (6 m wide
x 2.5 m high x 2.5 m deep and 3 x 2.5 x 2.5 m) with a window that
allowed free passage between the two rooms. Straw covered the floor;
perches, ropes, swings, and various portable objects were present in
each room. Food and water were available ad libitum. Observations
were made through glazed windows, which minimized the visibility
of the observers from the inside of the cage.
Table 1
Composition of the Groups
Group and subject
Adults
Ike
Alice
Beth
Fanny
Jill
Mercedes
Juveniles
Patti
Quincy
Rita
Tere
Ulysses
Willy
Yearlings and infants
Viola
Louisa
Dixie
Sex
Group 1
Male
Female
Female
Female
Female
Female
Female
Female
Female
Female
Male
Male
Female
Female
Female
Age
10
10
10
10
10
10?
3
3
3
2
2
1
1
1
<1
Task
1,2
2
2
1, 2
Adults
Sherlock
Celia
Erna
Greta
Hansje
Nina
Juveniles
Osa
Xavier
Yearlings and infants
Zola
Yves
Andrea
Bruce
Felicia
Group 2
Male
Female
Female
Female
Femple
Female
Female
Male
Female
Male
Female
Male
Female
+26
9
10
10
10
6
3
1
1,2
Note. For Task the numbers indicate that the animal solved the task
in the experiment of that number.
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
All rights, including for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies, are reserved.

PDF PAGE 3
SOCIAL INFLUENCE IN CAPUCHINS 161
Apparatus
The nut board in Task 1 consisted of two wooden panels (30 x 60
cm) mounted 3 cm apart. Twenty-four walnuts in the shell were
glued into holes in the top panel. About the top third of the nuts
remained exposed. The nut board was mounted in the center of a
wooden platform (91.5 x 25 x 80 cm; see Figure 1). As needed, the
board was removed from the platform and refilled with new nuts.
Four wooden blocks (5x5x8 cm) and four hexagonal metal nuts,
referred to hereafter as metal tools (8 cm, exterior diameter, and 3.5
cm, interior diameter), were tethered with nylon cord (70 cm long)
to the corners of the nut board. This was done to prevent the monkeys
from pounding the objects on the observation windows. Tethering
increased the probability of solution by keeping the tools near the
task but had no effect on the use of the tools to open nuts (cf. Beck,
1976). The platform was placed on the cage floor during testing
sessions.
The rod box in Task 2 was a transparent plastic box (25 x 34.5 x
5.3 cm) mounted on a plywood backing (see Figure 2). When the
internal sliding mechanism (painted on the exterior edge to be easily
visible) below the food reservoir was moved upward, sunflower seeds
fell down a tube into a food cup. The slide mechanism was 15.5 cm
from the end of a tube, which opened to the exterior by a 2.5-cm
opening. A black plastic rod (22.5 cm) was hung along the same edge
of the apparatus as the tube that provided access to the slider. As in
the nut board, tethering the rod increased the probability of solution
but did not affect the use of the object as a tool. The apparatus was
mounted vertically to a wire-mesh panel in the front of the cage
during test sessions. In a variation of Task 2 that was presented at the
end of the regular sessions, the chained rod was removed, and six
black wooden rods of the same length were provided in the adjoining
room.
Procedure
Experiment 1. Before the start of Experiment 1, the monkeys
were given walnuts by hand on several days. Several animals suc-
ceeded in opening them by banging and biting. At the start of each
experimental session, the apparatus was placed in one side of the
home cage. The animals were readmitted to that side, and observa-
tions began immediately. Instantaneous sampling at 10-s intervals of
the following behaviors was made: invesligate-consume (any general
Figure 1. A j uvenile male (Willy) illustrates the technique of pound-
ing open nuts with a metal tool at the nut board.
Figure 2. A juvenile female (Quincy) operates the rod box task while
her mother waits to collect sunflower seeds from the dispensing cup.
contact with the nut board); hit (with the hand alone); tap (with the
finger tips); slide (an object across the platform or board); and present
(at the apparatus but not engaged in any other activity). Two activities
performed at the apparatus, pound (one object with another) and dip
(into a cavity with a stick or length of straw), were scored in a one-
zero manner within 10-s intervals to provide a more complete record
for these brief events than obtained from instantaneous sampling.
Every instance of unusual combinations of objects and actions at the
platform was noted, as was the opening of any nut.
Experiment 2. A procedure similar to that used in Experiment 1
was used. Instantaneous sampling at 10-s intervals was used for the
behaviors investigate (any part of the apparatus), hit (any part of the
apparatus), take (food from the dispenser cup), and poke (the fingers
into the tube). One-zero sampling within the same interval was used
for probe (with an object into the tube or the food cup). We noted
the success or failure of probing acts in activating the food dispenser
and what objects were used to probe.
Observers were trained initially to identify individual animals in a
variation of the method with a different task. At the onset of each
experiment, an observer skilled in the method observed simultane-
ously with less experienced observers until reliabilities for common
acts and for presence at the apparatus reached 85% agreement on
three consecutive sessions. Reliabilities for rare acts were not com-
puted. In Experiment 2, independent observations at the midpoint of
testing confirmed the maintenance of interobserver reliability.
Analysis
Members of the two social groups were analyzed without regard to
group membership. Frequencies of particular behaviors were tallied
for all subjects that learned to solve each task (solvers) and for a
selection of adults and juveniles that did not learn to solve the tasks
(nonsolvers). The selected nonsolvers exhibited the greatest interest
in the apparatus within their age class. Thus, animals that appeared
to have the best probability of discovering the solutions to the
problems were compared with those that actually did acquire solution.
Three subjects from each social group (the adult male, an adult
female, and a juvenile) formed the nonsolver pool (N = 6) in
Experiment 1. A similar grouping (but different subjects) was used in
Experiment 2 (the adult male from each group, two adult females in
Group 2 and one from Group 1, and a juvenile from each group; N
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
All rights, including for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies, are reserved.

PDF PAGE 4
162 DOROTHY M. FRAGASZY AND ELISABETTA VISALBERGHI
= 7). Data from the yearlings in each social group (Louisa and Viola
in Group 1 and Yves and Zola in Group 2) were also tallied this way.
Several variables that indicated interest in the tasks were examined:
the number of intervals the subject was present, the number of bouts
(periods at the apparatus interrupted by fewer than three consecutive
intervals of absence), and the percentage of intervals at the apparatus
in which the subject was the only animal present. The solvers were
compared with nonsolvers on these variables by / tests. To determine
if the frequency of particular activities varied as a function of social
context, independent of the total amount of time spent at the appa-
ratus, we compared expected values with the observed frequencies of
particular acts for each subject when it was at the apparatus by itself
and when it was there with others. Expected frequencies for these
analyses were derived by multiplying the proportion of intervals at
the apparatus while alone or with another animal by the total fre-
quency of the act in question. The cases in which expected cell sizes
were less than 5 were not analyzed. These analyses were made for the
first four sessions (first block), the four sessions that preceded the
solution for each solver (presolution block), and the final four sessions
(last block). In all analyses a = .05 (two-tailed) was used for deter-
minations of statistical significance.
Experiment 1
Results
Interest in the apparatus. The nut board was attractive to
the animals on the first and every session. Over all sessions
the apparatus was visited on 89% of intervals in Group 1 and
on 69% in Group 2. The adult males in each group were able
to open nuts by biting them, which generated interest during
early sessions. Females and juveniles could not open nuts by
biting, although they tried to do so. Five animals learned to
use the metal tools provided with the apparatus to pound
open the nuts. The 1st solver in Group 1, Quincy, pounded a
nut open on Session 6. The 2nd solver in that group, Willy,
first opened nuts on Session 13. In Group 2, Erna first
pounded open a nut on the 4th session, Osa on the 12th, and
Hansje on the 16th. Once a subject had opened a nut, pound-
ing predominated its activity at the nut board. Pounding open
a nut required persistence: It often took four or more intervals
(more than 30 s) of repeated hard pounding to break the nut.
Frequently, the nut was partially opened by pounding and
then opened further by biting. Each solver opened at least 12
nuts.
The apparatus was visited on 70% of intervals for Group 1
and 23% for Group 2 before any animal solved the task. We
noted that the adult male in Group 2 opened nuts by biting
less frequently than the adult male in Group 1. During the
period with 1 solver, the percentage of intervals in which the
apparatus was occupied increased to 96% for Group 1 and
70% for Group 2. With the addition of other solvers, the
percentage remained in the mid-90s in Group 1 and between
75% and 95% in Group 2.
Although general interest in the apparatus was high, some
animals seemed less interested than others. For some, access
to the apparatus was limited as a consequence of social factors.
Although every subject in both groups was scored as present
at the apparatus at least once, the percentage of intervals each
subject spent at the apparatus varied widely from 52.9%
(Quincy) to less than 0.1% (Beth; see Table 2). In six of the
eight mother-offspring pairs, including those with infants less
than a year old, correlations in the number of intervals at the
apparatus over sessions were low (—.20 to +.27). Two mother-
offspring pairs showed significant positive correlations: Alice
with her 3-year-old daughter Quincy (a solver; .52) and Hansje
(a solver) with her daughter Zola (6-10 months old; .66). The
correlation between Alice and her son Ulysses was not signif-
icant (—.20), nor was the correlation between the siblings
Quincy and Ulysses.
Solvers and nonsolvers did not differ significantly in most
measures of general interest in the apparatus in the first block
before solvers had achieved their first solution (see Table 3).
The only significant difference between the groups was that
solvers were alone on a greater percentage of intervals in
which they were present at the apparatus than were nonsolvers
(M = 45% for solvers vs. 24% for nonsolvers), /(10) = 2.45,
p < .05. By the last block solvers were still present at the
apparatus by themselves on a significantly greater proportion
of intervals at the apparatus than nonsolvers (M = 40% for
solvers vs. 15% for nonsolvers), /(10) = 3.07, p < .05. In the
last block solvers were also at the apparatus on significantly
more intervals than nonsolvers (M = 44% for solvers vs. 31 %
for nonsolvers), t(\0) = 3.045, p < .02. Over all sessions
nonsolvers were at the apparatus on 8% of intervals, and
solvers on 29%, Wilcoxon z = 3.92, p < .001.
Table 2
Percentage of Intervals Present at the Nut Board and
Rod Box
Group and subject
Group 1
Ike
Alice
Beth
Mercedes
Fannv
Jill
Patti
Quincy
Rita
Tere
Ulysses
Willy
Viola
Louisa
Dixie
Group 2
Sherlock
Hansje
Greta
Celia
Nina
Erna
Osa
Xavier
Yves
Zola
Andrea
Bruce
Felicia
Nut board
24
42
1
1
1
1
2
53"
5
1
13
25"
3
1
4
11
29"
9
1
1
16a
21a
6
4
10
3
1
1
Rod box
6
47
59°
\"j
25"
18a
1
5
15
Note. Rod box was not scored by percentage of intervals present at
the apparatus for Group 2: Osa did, however, solve this task.
a Solver.
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
All rights, including for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies, are reserved.

PDF PAGE 5
SOCIAL INFLUENCE IN CAPUCHINS 163
Table 3
Interest in the Apparatus in Four-Session Blocks
Solvers
Block and variable
First
% of intervals present
No. of bouts
Mean no. of intervals/bout
% of intervals alone
Last
% of intervals present
No. of bouts
Mean no. of intervals/bout
% of intervals alone
Nut board
M±SD
25 ± 15
22 ±8
5.4 ± 1.9
45 ± 10
44 ±22
25 ±8
8 ± 5
40 ± 18
Rod box
M±SD
52 ±41
19 + 6
11.5 ±6.7
36 ± 18
26 ±22
26+ 18
4.2 ± 2.6
40 ± 12
Nonsolvers
Nut board
M+SD
10 ± 10
15 ± 10
3.8 ± 1.7
24*+ 16
31** + 22
29 + 8
5.4 ±3.7
15** ±9
Rod box
M+SD
16 ±26
9* ±4
60.0 ±8.6
11*+ 12
14 ± 13.0
21 + 20
2.7+ 1.3
48 + 36
Note. An interval was 10 s.
*p<.05. **/><.02.
Exploratory behaviors. The solvers exhibited a variety of
exploratory behaviors at the apparatus from the very first
sessions. Aside from direct attempts to open the nuts by biting
and slapping (which accounted for 52% of all intervals of
interaction in the first block), the monkeys also performed
behaviors that involved the tools or, less frequently, other
objects placed in relation to the tools or to the nuts. In the
first block these were performed by animals that would be-
come solvers. Unsuccessful pounding occurred on an average
of 10.6 intervals for each eventual solver in the first block.
Other combinatorial behaviors (performed at one fifth the
rate of unsuccessful pounding in the first block and only by
eventual solvers) included probing straw and sticks into crev-
ices of the apparatus and into opened shells (see Figure 3).
Small objects were placed inside the opened nuts, placed
inside of and then removed from the center of the metal tool,
or inserted all the way through it if it was standing on edge.
Only two nonsolvers performed any of these exploratory
behaviors during all sessions (during a total of 5 bouts); each
solver performed them in at least 1 bout prior to its first
solution and in an average of 9 bouts overall.
Figure 3. An adult female (Erna) probes an opened nut with a piece
of straw.
Acquisition of pounding. The pattern of acquisition of
efficient pounding varied somewhat across solvers. Four
seemed to have good aim after minimal practice; major
improvements in efficiency were related to the strength of the
blow and were achieved more slowly. The 5th solver used
strong blows from the beginning but with very poor aim. No
subject used the (inefficient) wooden block when attempting
to pound except Quincy in the 5th session, before she had
opened any nut.
Social context of pounding and exploration. There is no
evidence of facilitation of pounding in later solvers from
observation of earlier solvers. The first solvers in each group
did not pound at the apparatus with a tool before the session
in which they first pounded a nut open. Later solvers in each
group did pound lightly or without striking the nuts in 8 to
10 bouts before their first solutions. During the presolution
block the 3 later solvers pounded during an average of 10
intervals while alone, 1 interval with a solver, and 6 intervals
with nonsolvers. When Willy, the 2nd solver in Group 1, first
opened a nut by pounding, Ike (an adult male) had opened
several nuts in that session, and there was much activity at
the board. Quincy, the 1st solver, had not pounded during
any interval during which Willy was present and, in fact,
never opened a nut that session. During the session in which
the 2nd solver in Group 2 (Osa) first opened a nut, the 1st
solver (Erna) did not open any nuts, and Erna pounded only
once, when Osa was not present at the apparatus. The 3rd
solver in Group 2 (Hansje) first opened a nut before Osa or
Erna did so in that session; Hansje was not present when they
had pounded earlier, and she pounded in that session only
when Erna and Osa were not at the apparatus. At the time of
their first solutions, all solvers except Willy were alone.
Exploratory combinatorial behaviors were also performed
independently of a model's behavior during all stages of
acquisition and even after acquisition. Later solvers per-
formed some of these before any solver exhibited pounding.
Eighty-four percent of all combinatorial acts were performed
while the subject was at the apparatus by itself. Of the 14
performed by an individual before its acquisition of the so-
lution, 12 occurred while the subject was alone. Even after
the solution, most exploratory combinatorial behaviors oc-
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
All rights, including for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies, are reserved.

PDF PAGE 6
164 DOROTHY M. FRAGASZY AND ELISABETTA VISALBERGHI
curred while the subject was alone (19 while alone and 10
with others). These frequencies differ significantly from the
frequencies expected from the overall percentage of intervals
at the apparatus alone or with others, x2( 1, N = 43) = 5.25, p
<.05.
In short, immediate, direct imitation of a model's pounding
open nuts did not occur. Neither was interest in the tools
enhanced, pounding facilitated, or exploratory behaviors that
involved combinations of objects at the apparatus facilitated.
In fact, the data suggest that relevant exploratory behaviors
were performed by several subjects not only independently
but preferentially while alone.
To test the hypothesis that solvers performed particular acts
preferentially while alone, we compared the frequency with
which solvers pounded when they were alone versus when
they were at the apparatus with another animal. We used the
percentage of intervals that solvers were present at the appa-
ratus when alone and when they were present with another
animal in the two conditions to derive expected frequencies
for pound for each subject. Of the 3 solvers that pounded in
the first block, 2 did so significantly more often than expected
while alone, %2s(l, TV = 17 and 16) > 4.05, p < .044. The 3rd
exhibited the same pattern (p = .07, N = 11).
In the last block all solvers in Group 2 pounded more often
while alone than expected, 1 significantly so, x20, N = 62) =
4.53, p = .033. In Group 1, Quincy was shadowed by Alice
and rarely alone at the apparatus in the last block. Willy (the
youngest solver) pounded more often with another individual
than expected in the last block, x2U, N = 75) = 12.00, p <
.001. Willy frequently opened nuts but then did not even
attempt to eat them, continuing instead to pound.
Influence of solvers on nonsolvers. When the behavior of
nonsolvers was examined in relation to the presence of solvers,
again no pattern that suggested social facilitation of particular
acts (such as pounding without a tool) was observed, nor was
any effect on interest in the tool (see Table 4). Socially
mediated enhancement of interest in the apparatus was evi-
dent, however. In the first block all nonsolvers bit or explored
the apparatus more often than expected while present with
another (M = 8.2 intervals) and more often than while alone
Table 4
Mean Frequency of Acts per Nonsolver (N = 6) at the Nut
Board Over Four-Session Blocks bv Social Context
Social context
Block
With With With others
Alone others solver and solver Sum
First
Present
Bite
Other exploratory
Last
Present
Bite
Other exploratory
Investigate-consume
17.0
0.7
3.5
19.2
1.8
0.0
8.7
38.0
7.5
0.7
23.5
1.3
0.0
9.8
na
na
na
46.2
2.3
0.0
27.7
na
na
na
61.8
1.6
0.0
39.5
55.0
8.2
4.2
150.7
7.0
0.0
85.7
Note. Data are number of 10-s intervals of 480 total intervals.
(M = 4.2 intervals). In the last block, 5 of 6 nonsolvers were
active at the apparatus more often than expected while present
with other nonsolvers, and nonsolvers were present or active
at the apparatus most often with a solver.
Once an animal had learned to open nuts, that animal's
presence or behavior at the nut board appeared to serve as a
cue for nonsolvers that nuts might be available. Indeed, Alice
(Quincy's mother) rapidly approached the nut board when
Quincy went to it. Quincy's and Willy's quiet activities did
not seem to influence Ike, but he often ran to the nut board
when pounding occurred. In Group 2, no individual shad-
owed a solver in the way Alice shadowed Quincy, although
the same pattern was evident. Solvers attracted other animals
to the nut board, when the social conditions at the Board
permitted, but the activity of the solvers with tools seemed
irrelevant to the behavior of the others. The behavior of the
4 yearlings (Louisa, Viola, Yves, and Zola) was similar in the
two groups, although the 2 in Group 2 (Yves and Zola) were
offspring of solvers, and the 2 in Group 1 (Louisa and Viola)
were offspring of nonsolvers. Observation of solvers was not
more influential for the younger animals than for the older
animals.
Discussion
The 5 animals that learned to open nuts by pounding
differed from those that did not in the level of interest they
expressed in the apparatus (in the form of activity at the
apparatus while alone) and in the variety of exploratory
behaviors performed there. Rather than observing social fa-
cilitation of exploration at the apparatus or imitation of novel
behaviors, we found that solvers acquired efficiency in pound-
ing while at the apparatus alone. Observation of others at the
apparatus did not seem to affect the behaviors any observer
directed toward the apparatus, whether the observer was a
juvenile or an adult, or kin to the animal at the apparatus or
not, or a solver or a nonsolver. The solver's pounding, how-
ever, did attract others to the apparatus, where they were able
to share the opened nuts.
These findings do not indicate an important role for direct
social transmission of instrumental behaviors (through obser-
vational learning of a relationship or a new act or facilitation
of a behavior already in the repertoire) in these monkeys.
Social context was important, as expected, in determining
access to the apparatus. Certain animals monopolized the
apparatus; the presence of only certain others was tolerated
by the monopolizers.
We turn now to the second experiment, in which a rather
different spatial arrangement of the apparatus restricted ac-
cess, and in which a single tool was present. The task in the
second experiment was similar, physically and conceptually,
to a probing task that several of these monkeys could already
solve (Westergaard & Fragaszy, 1987). Thus, the task in
Experiment 2 was relevant to the question of social influence
under the special circumstance in which some members of
the group shared experience with using a tool in a related
task.
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
All rights, including for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies, are reserved.

PDF PAGE 7
SOCIAL INFLUENCE IN CAPUCHINS 165
Experiment 2
Results
Interest in the apparatus. As in Experiment 1, the appa-
ratus provided in Experiment 2 was attractive to the animals
in each group over the entire period of testing. Overall, the
rod box was visited on 89% of intervals in Group 1, exactly
the same percentage as for the nut board (see Table 2). (Tallies
for each animal in the group over all sessions were done only
in Group 1.) As in Experiment 1, 5 monkeys eventually
learned to operate the apparatus to obtain sunflower seeds. In
this case, all the solvers were juveniles or subadults. The first
solver in Group 1 was Quincy in Session 10, followed by
Ulysses on Session 14, Rita on Session 19, and Willy on
Session 25. The only solver in Group 2 was Osa, who first
used the rod successfully on Session 17.
In this task, unlike the nut board, the total number of
intervals in which animals visited the apparatus was not
significantly affected by the presence of one or more solvers.
On average, nonsolvers in Group 1 were at the apparatus in
fewer intervals over all sessions than solvers in their group
and in proportions nearly identical to those observed in
Experiment 1 (mean percentages of intervals at apparatus =
28% for 4 solvers vs. 8% for all other adults and juveniles),
Wilcoxon z = 4.37, p < .001. Variability across solvers in
Group 1 in percentage of intervals at the apparatus over all
sessions was greater in this task than with the nut board, with
values ranging from 59% for Quincy to less than 1% for Rita.
And as in Experiment 1, presence at the apparatus varied
widely across nonsolvers in Group 1 (from <1% of intervals
to 47%), although every animal visited the apparatus in two
or more sessions.
Correlations between mothers and their offspring in the
number of intervals in which they were present at the appa-
ratus over days were significantly positive in three of six cases
(Alice with Ulysses, Alice with Quincy, and Mercedes with
Willy). In all the significant correlations, the offspring was a
solver. In the other mother-offspring pairs, neither member
of the pair was a solver. The correlation for the same variable
between Quincy and her sibling Ulysses was not significant.
In the first block solvers differed from nonsolvers in two
variables that reflected interest in the task (see Table 3). First,
solvers were at the apparatus on more bouts than nonsolvers
in the first block (M = 11.5 for solvers vs. 6.0 for nonsolvers),
t(\ 1) = 2.943, p = .014. Second, as in Experiment 1, solvers
were alone at the apparatus in the first block on a greater
proportion of intervals than nonsolvers (M = 36% for solvers
vs. 11% for nonsolvers), t(\ 1) = 2.843, p < .01. By the last
block there were no significant differences between solvers
and nonsolvers in general measures of interest in the appara-
tus.
Although solvers and nonsolvers did not differ in terms of
presence at the apparatus, solvers displayed more frequent
investigatory behaviors than nonsolvers. Hitting the box with
a hand or an object, poking fingers into the cup and tube,
and probing into the cup with the rod and other objects
occurred, on average, in 22.4 intervals in the first block for
each eventual solver versus in 1.3 intervals for each nonsolver.
The difference in frequency of directed exploration was not
as strongly predictive of later acquisition as it was in Experi-
ment 1, however. One solver (Rita) performed very few
exploratory acts before successfully probing. One nonsolver
(Alice) performed many of these actions in the first four
sessions. But after her daughter Quincy became a solver, Alice
restricted her activities at the apparatus, only taking advantage
of the food provided by Quincy's probing acts. Another
nonsolver, Ike, occasionally investigated the rod when it re-
mained lodged in the tube (chain end in) after Quincy had
probed. He even pushed the rod in the correct direction in a
few cases but never sufficiently far enough to activate the
slider mechanism.
Probing exploratory behavior. Solvers varied considerably
in the pattern of exploratory attempts that preceded a solu-
tion. Four of the 5 solvers engaged in frequent exploratory
behaviors at the rod box before achieving solution. Two of
these were the 1st solvers in their groups (Osa and Quincy).
On the 1st session Quincy carefully explored the entire ap-
paratus, repeatedly attempted to insert a straw directly into
the sliding mechanism, and repeatedly attempted to probe
into the tube with straw. By Session 4 she was probing into
the tube with chow, exploring the rod, using the rod to probe
into the food cup, and hitting the apparatus with the rod.
During this period she continued to probe the cup and the
tube with straw. On the 10th session she successfully used the
rod to probe after several attempts in which she inserted the
chained end of the rod, which made insertion more difficult.
She continued to use the wrong end of the rod intermittently
thereafter. Osa displayed less exploratory behavior than
Quincy in the first few sessions but attempted to insert the
rod much sooner (on Session 3). She also probed into the
tube with other materials and used the rod to probe in the
cup. Between Session 8 and Session 17, Osa exhibited few
unusual behaviors at the apparatus. On Session 17, Osa first
hit the rod box with the rod, then probed unsuccessfully, and
a few minutes later probed successfully. She then continued
to probe successfully during a good portion of all remaining
sessions.
Second solvers (Rita, Ulysses, and Willy, all in Group 1)
had the opportunity to observe a solver and to obtain food
provided by the solver's probing acts. They also had to com-
pete with Alice (Quincy's mother and ever-present compan-
ion) for access to the food and for proximity to the apparatus.
Many animals did not attempt to go near the apparatus when
Quincy and Alice were there together, but the 2 male juveniles
Ulysses and Willy did. Ulysses exhibited less exploration than
Quincy or Osa. On Session 11. after Quincy left the rod in
the tube (where it stuck sometimes if she put the chained end
in), Ulysses tried to probe. He attempted to probe the tube
and the cup on subsequent sessions. On Session 14, he probed
successfully within the first 2 min of the session, after no
preliminary errors. Willy exhibited a similar pattern of direct
exploration. He probed into the cup with the rod and straw
in Session 3 and spent many intervals on later sessions poking
into the cup and tube with his fingers. He also hit the box
with the rod. Between Session 16 and Session 25, no unusual
behaviors were noted, beyond the exploratory behaviors just
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
All rights, including for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies, are reserved.

PDF PAGE 8
166 DOROTHY M. FRAGASZY AND ELISABETTA VISALBERGHI
mentioned. However, on Session 25, after one unsuccessful
attempt at probing, he succeeded in the task. Both Ulysses
and Willy probed intermittently after their first solutions, at
times when Quincy left the apparatus.
The 5th solver, Rita, displayed a different pattern than
Ulysses or Willy. Rita was at the apparatus during only 20%
of the sessions and for brief periods. She investigated the box
for a few intervals on the 1st session. Then, after no interven-
ing bouts, she was present at the apparatus for a total of 9
intervals in Session 19, distributed in two bouts. In these brief
periods she investigated the rod and in the second bout probed
successfully twice. She collected food from her successful acts
only the second time. She probed a few other times after this
session, in each case during very brief bouts.
Social context of probing and exploration. Significant dis-
crepancies (reflected in chi-square analyses) in the distribution
of activities at the apparatus as a function of social context
were less frequent than in Experiment 1. During the first
block, Quincy was the only solver to attempt to probe, except
one attempt by Willy, and Quincy did these actions signifi-
cantly more often while alone than while at the apparatus
with another, \2(\, N = 16) = 15.43, p < .001. In the last
block Quincy and Willy poked and hit the apparatus more
often than expected while alone, but Quincy probed more
often than expected while with others (primarily her mother,
Alice). The others (Willy, Ulysses, and Osa) distributed prob-
ing by social context as expected, except for Rita, who did
not probe at all.
The behavior of nonsolvers was affected more in the direc-
tion of inhibition than facilitation while in the presence of
others (see Table 5). Of the 7 nonsolvers, 5 investigated, hit,
or poked the apparatus more often while alone than expected
in the first block. Only 1 subject (Alice) did this often enough
to permit analysis, and the difference between observed and
expected values was significant in this case, x2(l, W = 26) =
40.58, p < .001. The other 2 nonsolvers either did not
investigate the apparatus in the first block (Tere) or did so
only once (Ike) while with others. In the last block, Erna and
Ike investigated the apparatus while alone significantly more
often than expected by chance, x2s(l, N= 34 and 53) > 6.21,
p < .004, both cases. The other nonsolvers investigated either
rarely or as expected.
Investigative behaviors by the 4 yearlings were more af-
fected by social context than were those of the adults but were
in the same direction. During the first block 2 of the 4 (Yves
and Zola) were alone on more than half of their intervals at
the apparatus. In the last block the two instances of directed
exploration (hitting and probing into the cup) by animals in
this age group occurred while the individuals were alone, and
all 4 investigated the apparatus more frequently while alone
than expected. The discrepancy between observed and ex-
pected values was significant in 3 of the 4 individuals, x2s(l,
N = 40, 50, and 81) > 4.32, p < .04, all three cases.
Behavior with Osa removed. To determine if nonsolvers
in Group 2 that rarely approached the apparatus would ap-
proach and explore the apparatus more if it were not monop-
olized by the single solver, Osa was removed during four
sessions after the completion of regular testing. In the third
session with Osa removed, there was more investigation of
Table 5
Mean Frequency of Acts per Nonsolver (N = 7) at the Rod
Box Over Four-Session Blocks by Social Context
Social context
Block
First
Present
Investigate
Hit
Poke
Probe (unsuccessful)
Last
Present
Investigate
Hit
Poke
Probe (unsuccessful)
Alone
8.1
8.1
0.0
0.3
0.0
25.7
18.1
0.6
0.3
0.3
others
67.4
60.8
0.4
0.6
0.0
12.6
7.6
0.3
0.0
0.1
solver
na
na
na
na
na
19.6
5.1
0.0
0.0
0.6
and solver
na
na
na
na
na
0.1
3.4
0.0
0.0
0.0
Sum
75.5
68.9
0.4
0.9
0.0
58.0
34.2
0.9
0.3
1.0
Note. Data are number of 10-s intervals of 480 total intervals.
the box by younger animals (Xavier and Zola), and Xavier
even probed in the tube with the rod (unsuccessfully). On
other sessions, however, there was even less activity at the
apparatus than usual, and we did not pursue this procedure
further.
Behavior with many rods. A variation of the apparatus
was presented at the end of regular sessions to both groups:
Six loose rods were given in place of the tethered rod. This
variation, like the previous one, was pursued to provide
greater opportunity to animals other than the primary solver
in Group 1 (Quincy) or the only solver in Group 2 to explore
the apparatus with rods. The initial presentation of many rods
in Group 1 produced a flurry of activity at the apparatus for
the first 2 min of the session. Several nonsolvers carried rods
from the room where they were presented into the other room
and up to the apparatus and used them to probe in the cup
and to push through the mesh of the cage. In the 3rd min
Quincy probed successfully, and the regular pattern seen in
previous sessions reappeared: Quincy probed, and Alice and
Quincy together controlled access to the apparatus. Neverthe-
less, more frequent exploratory actions at the apparatus (es-
pecially probing in the cup) took place when many rods were
present, and some other unusual actions were noted. One
involved passive cooperation between Quincy and her mother
Alice. Quincy frequently dropped the rod after probing, and
the loose rod fell to the floor. Several times when this hap-
pened (at least 5 times in the first session with many rods),
Alice retrieved the rod and returned to the rod box. She did
not attempt to use it, however, and instead allowed Quincy
to take it (after which Quincy probed and they jointly collected
food).
Two nonsolvers in Group 1 (Tere and Ike) probed unsuc-
cessfully, but with the correct orientation of the rod to the
tube, during these sessions. Ike in particular engaged in several
bouts of exploration of the apparatus, which included at-
tempts to probe that failed because he did not insert the rod
far enough to activate the slider. Twice he was seen to examine
a rod for about 15-20 s, turning it over slowly from end to
end and pausing intermittently to look toward Quincy as she
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
All rights, including for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies, are reserved.

PDF PAGE 9
SOCIAL INFLUENCE IN CAPUCHINS 167
probed successfully. However, these episodes of exploration
coupled with observation were not followed within the next
few minutes by attempts to probe.
The pattern of behaviors in Group 2 during sessions with
many rods were similar to those in Group 1: Two nonsolvers
probed unsuccessfully during these sessions (Xavier once and
Erna several times). In both cases, they did not push the rod
far enough into the tube. Erna also probed unsuccessfully
with straw. It appeared that Ike and Erna, and perhaps Xavier
and Tere, associated insertion of the rod in the tube with
activation of the apparatus, but they did not perform the
correct probing action vigorously enough.
General Discussion
Five monkeys living in social groups learned to open nuts
by pounding them with a provided metal tool, and 5 monkeys
(3 of which learned to solve both tasks) learned to use a rod
to activate a machine that dispensed sunflower seeds. These
monkeys included juveniles and adults, males and females.
In both experiments, animals that learned to solve the task
(solvers) showed greater interest in the apparatus than those
that did not learn to solve the task (nonsolvers). The differ-
ences were evident in terms of the proportion of samples in
which the individual was present at the apparatus, and in
which it was at the apparatus while alone. Differential interest
in the task was associated with exploratory behaviors involv-
ing the tools and objects in relation to the tools and apparatus
in both experiments. In Experiment 1, solvers exhibited more
instances than nonsolvers of combinatorial explorations of
objects, including the tools, at the nut board. In Experiment
2, 4 of 5 solvers exhibited more frequent exploratory probing
actions at the rod box than most nonsolvers, but in this task
the behavioral distinctions between eventual solvers and non-
solvers was not as clear-cut. In fact, 1 solver used the tool
correctly on its first bout of handling it. During sessions in
which several rods were presented with the rod box, 4 non-
solvers came close to solving the task, correctly orienting the
tool in the box but not using sufficient force.
All of the 5 solvers in the rod box task had used sticks
previously to probe into an enclosed container to obtain
yogurt or syrup (Westergaard & Fragaszy, 1987), as had 3 of
the 4 nonsolvers that seemed close to solution in the last few
sessions. On the other hand, several of the other nonsolvers
also had used tools in the latter task, but this was not reflected
in their behavior toward the rod box. Thus, experience with
a probing tool may have facilitated acquisition of successful
probing in the new task, but such experience was not suffi-
cient.
There was no evidence that observation of a skilled tool
user led to direct imitation of an act, either in terms of
behaviors exhibited while at the apparatus contempora-
neously with a solver or in terms of changes in behavior across
sessions before and after solvers were present. Nor was there
evidence in Experiment 1 that the presence of solvers en-
hanced the interest of nonsolvers in the tools or facilitated the
performance of pounding, an action in the repertoire of all
animals older than a few months (Fragaszy & Adams-Curtis,
1987). Eventual solvers exposed to a solver did pound before
solution, and this is consistent with a general facilitatory effect
of observing a solver pounding. They did so, however, inde-
pendently of the solver's immediate activities, and it is just as
plausible that they began to pound as a consequence of their
own explorations of the apparatus, rather than from watching
a solver. We have no way to distinguish between these two
possibilities with our data. Nor can we differentiate between
early and later solvers in terms of initial interest in the task
or the production of combinatorial acts at the apparatus. In
short, the sources of individual differences in the timing of
acquisition are not known.
In Experiment 2, two different aspects of the results suggest
that observation of solvers may have led to the recognition
that an association between the tool and the apparatus was
necessary to obtain seeds. One line of evidence concerns
nonsolvers; the other, a solver. In later sessions 2 young
nonsolvers (1 in each group), which rarely obtained access to
the apparatus and had limited histories of exploration with it,
used the tool correctly on a few occasions but without suffi-
cient force. Two adult nonsolvers used the tool correctly more
frequently but with the same deficit. These animals may have
stumbled onto the correct orientation of the tool to the
apparatus strictly on their own, but this seems improbable.
There was no consequence from their own actions shaping
their behavior to approximate correct use of the tool more
closely. In fact, the food cup of the apparatus was a more
probable target for probing if facilitation of probing occurred
without influence on the target of the activity. The food cup
was directly associated with food, and it was easy to put the
rod into it. Moreover, the behavior of a solver, Rita, which
used the tool correctly on her first try, is supportive of the
suggestion that onlookers could learn something about the
necessity of putting the rod in a particular place to operate
the device. However, all of these animals had observed re-
peatedly and experienced themselves the use of sticks as tools
with the probing task used by Westergaard and Fragaszy
(1987).
If the observation of solvers aided recognition that a spatial
relationship between tool and apparatus had to be obtained,
the process is not a robust one. If it were, more animals would
have become solvers in both experiments, and there would
have been more partial attempts by nonsolvers. Instead, only
some animals appeared to have generalized from past expe-
rience with sticks as tools.
In contrast to the weak evidence of social influence on
instrumental activity, the nonsolvers' ability to use the solver's
behavior as a cue that food would be forthcoming developed
quickly. The exploitation of solver's activities by nonsolvers
was a common feature in both experiments. Moreover, when
an animal solved the task frequently, others sometimes aban-
doned their own investigatory behaviors in favor of getting
food procured by the solver.
The minimal facilitatory effect of observation found in
these studies is in general agreement with findings from
previous studies that have investigated tool-using and prob-
lem-solving behaviors in these monkeys. Many years ago,
Thorndike (1911) found no evidence of spontaneous imita-
tion between capuchins. Visalberghi (in press) observed that
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
All rights, including for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies, are reserved.

PDF PAGE 10
168 DOROTHY M. FRAGASZY AND ELISABETTA VISALBERGHI
only two animals in a large group of capuchins spontaneously
learned to pound open nuts by using a tool, even though
numerous others watched with interest. Onlookers never at-
tempted to pound, despite having access to both tools and
nuts. In a study with a three-step mechanical puzzle (Adams-
Curtis & Fragaszy, 1988), the activities of a solver at the
apparatus were not associated with specific behavioral changes
on the part of near observers, except for the occasional at-
tempted theft of the raisin uncovered at the last step of the
puzzle. The solver's presence at the puzzle apparatus influ-
enced the amount of time juveniles (age peers of the solver)
spent near the puzzle and the proportion of time near the
puzzle that they spent contacting it. But in no case did an
observer alter its behavior toward the puzzle in a way that
indicated that observation of solution facilitated its acquisi-
tion of the appropriate sequence of behaviors needed to solve
the puzzle.
The findings of exploitation, but little or no benefit from
observation for acquisition of a novel skill, are similar to those
reported by Giraldeau and LeFebvre (1987) in studies of social
transmission of food-finding behaviors in pigeons. When birds
observed a demonstrator that obtained food from a novel
apparatus, they did not learn how to open the apparatus as
long as they could scrounge from the demonstrator's food.
When scrounging was prevented, observers did benefit from
watching a demonstrator. In a flock those birds that initially
solved the problem and obtained food got better at the task;
those who scrounged simply followed the birds that could
produce the food. It seems likely that prevention of scrounging
may enhance the probability of observational influence on
learning a novel instrumental behavior in capuchins.
In addition to facilitation of a behavior or enhancement of
interest in a place or an object, the potential consequences of
social observation include inhibitory or disinhibitory effects
and effects on general arousal (Bandura. 1986). The former
concerns actions already in the animal's repertoire, such as
pounding or poking, in this study. As we noted earlier, there
was little evidence that performance of pounding or poking
was facilitated in our study. The latter concerns activity level.
Activity level was not assessed systematically in this study,
but casual observations suggest that increased activity on the
part of the observer is a likely consequence of observing
another interacting with an object while displaying excitement
(e.g., giving vocalizations associated with the arrival of food,
moving quickly, and manipulating objects forcefully). In-
creased activity, coupled with increased interest in an object,
may increase the likelihood of independent discovery of the
properties of objects or consequences of actions.
The form of presentation of the task in these studies (for
brief intermittent periods) probably worked against finding
social enhancement of interest in specific places or objects.
The solver and those tolerated by the solver could monopolize
the task and restrict other animals' opportunities for explo-
ration after the observation. More extended presentations of
a different tool-using task did result in a larger proportion of
capuchins in a social group's learning to solve the task (Wes-
tergaard & Fragaszy, 1987). However, it was not possible to
attribute changes in the behavior of individual animals over
sessions to observations of another at the apparatus rather
than to practice alone.
The propensity to show increased interest in objects, and
possibly to learn about objects and relations between objects
by watching others interacting with them, may be muted in
capuchins by demands for social vigilance and the mainte-
nance of spacing between animals. In these studies only a few
(younger) animals were tolerated freely at either apparatus.
Other animals obtained access to the apparatus only when
certain others were not present. Kinship was not a guarantee
of access to a resource held by one's mother or sibling.
The data available now on the acquisition of tool-using
behaviors in groups of capuchins all point to one or more
severe constraints in the social transmission of novel instru-
mental behaviors. Nevertheless, the suggestive observations
from a previous study (Westergaard & Fragaszy, 1987) of a
mother's allowing her infant to perform the tool-using act
with her and sharing in the obtained goods and the subsequent
smooth acquisition of the behavior by the infant still pique
our interest in the capacity of capuchins to learn from each
other. It seems that there could be enabling social circum-
stances, which may be rarely achieved, for social influence to
occur in an unambiguous form. Perhaps one prerequisite is
coaction. Observation alone may not be sufficient for social
learning of instrumental skills in these monkeys. Coaction or
immediate practice enhance the efficacy of observation to
affect motor skills in humans (Carroll & Bandura, 1985). It
can be expected to play as great a role in nonhumans, for
which representational abilities are presumably more limiting.
Perhaps also observation or coaction with the task must
occur at certain points in the acquisition process for it to be
effective. Vygotsky's conception of the "zone of proximal
development" seems relevant to the learning of a new skill
through coaction, as it does to generalization of a skill from
one context to another through observation of another's using
the skill in the new context (Rogoff & Wertsch, 1984). In
humans the efficacy of observation on the acquisition of a
new variant of a skill is related to the skill level of the observer
at the time the new skill is modeled (Bandura, 1986). It is no
doubt too much to expect that observation have equivalent
effects regardless of what the subject (of any species) under-
stands about the task.
However, social observation may have the effect of maxi-
mizing the repertoire of behavior developed by each animal
through the effects of observation on interest in objects or
places and, perhaps, on level of activity. Possible conse-
quences of social observation deserve continued study, partic-
ularly in young animals, which have the greatest potential to
show an increase in repertoire as a consequence of watching
or being with others.
Social transmission of instrumental behaviors is assumed
or suspected to occur in wild chimpanzees (McGrew, Tutin,
& Baldwin, 1979; Nishida, 1986), in contrast to its apparent
absence in wild capuchins. Yet in captivity both these genera
exhibit frequent tool-using behaviors. We suggest that the
differences between the genera in the frequency with which
socially transmitted behaviors are observed in the wild can
reflect the influence of social constraints in capuchins. The
instrumental behaviors of wild chimpanzees most frequently
mentioned as potentially socially transmitted (e.g., dipping
for ants, fishing for termites; McGrew, 1977) are behaviors
that infants learn over a long period while near their mothers,
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
All rights, including for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies, are reserved.

PDF PAGE 11
SOCIAL INFLUENCE IN CAPUCHINS 169
away from other members of the social group. They have the
opportunity in these instances to coact with their mothers,
and their mothers are clearly not threatened by the infants'
attempts to sample their foods or manipulate their tools. This
set of circumstances makes social transmission through coac-
tion, practice, and enhancement of interest in objects more
likely than in group-housed capuchins, where mothers and
infants, and all other dyads, are almost always influenced by
other animals nearby, and where extensive opportunities for
coaction are limited. We also point out that many effective
innovations that involve the use of tools in wild chimpanzees
and do not have a coactive element are not transmitted
socially, even after repeated modeling (cf. Kummer & Good-
all, 1985). The use of cans to produce an impressively noisy
display by a male chimpanzee is a good example (Goodall,
1971). This behavior, observed intently by many other chim-
panzees, did not spread in the group. A recent study that
assessed the ability of young chimpanzees to learn a tool-
using behavior through observation likewise produced no
substantive evidence of imitation (Tomasello et al., 1987).
The great attention given to possible instances of social trans-
mission can lead to a distorted perception of the frequency of
this kind of learning in chimpanzees (and other genera) and
of its contribution to their behavioral repertoire.
Discerning the conditions that support the acquisition of
novel behaviors in various genera is a challenge. It is worth
undertaking, however, in order to develop a truly comparative
understanding of the impressive human ability to learn from
others. This requires an appreciation of the social factors that
facilitate the process, as well as of the characteristics of the
individual who may profit from observation and from asso-
ciation with others.
References
Adams-Curtis, L. E., &Fragaszy, D. M. (1988). Behavior by capuchin
monkeys (Cebus apella) toward a sequential puzzle. Unpublished
manuscript.
Antinucci, F., & Visalberghi, E. (1986). Tool use in Cebus apella: A
case study. International Journal of Primatology, 7, 349-361.
Bandura, A. (1986). Social foundations of thought and action. Engle-
wood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Beck, B. (1976). Tool use by captive pigtailed macaques. Primates,
17, 301-310.
Bierens de Haan, J. A. (1931). Werkzeuggebrauch und Werkzeugh-
erstellung bei einum Niedieren Affen (Cebus hypoleucus Humb)
[Use and manufacture of tools by a capuchin monkey.] Zeitschrift
fur vergleichende Physiologic, 13, 639-695.
Boinski, S. (1988). An attack by Cebus capucinus on a poisonous
snake (Bothrops asper) using a branch as a club. American Journal
of Primatology, 14, 177-179.
Box, H. O., & Fragaszy, D. M. (1986). The development of social
behavior and cognitive abilities. In J. Else & P. Lee (Eds.), Primate
ontogeny, cognition, and social behavior (pp. 119-128). Cambridge,
United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press.
Carroll, W. R., & Bandura, A. (1985). Role of timing of visual
monitoring and motor rehearsal in observational learning of action
patterns. Journal of Motor Behavior, 17, 269-281.
Chamove, A. S. (1974). Failure to find observational learning. Journal
of Behavioral Science, 2(2), 39-41.
Cook, M., Mineka, S., Wolkenstein, B., & Laitsch, K. (1985). Obser-
vational conditioning of snake fear in unrelated rhesus monkeys.
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 94, 591-610.
Cooper, L. R., & Harlow, H. F. (1961). Note on a cebus monkey's
use of a stick as a weapon. Psychological Reports, 8, 418.
Curio, E., Ernst, V., & Vieth, W. (1978). Cultural transmission of
enemy recognition: One function of mobbing. Science, 202, 899-
901.
Darby, C., & Riopelle, A. (1959). Observational learning in the rhesus
monkey. Journal of Comparative and Physiological Psychology,
52, 94-98.
Darwin, E. (1794). Zoonomia or, the laws of organic life (Vol. 1).
London: J. Johnson, in St. Paul's Church-Yard.
Fragaszy, D. M., & Adams-Curtis, L. (1987, August). Manipulative
behavior in tufted capuchins (Cebus apella): Development and social
context. Paper presented at the International Ethological Congress,
Madison, WI.
Galef, B. G., Jr. (1977). Mechanisms for the social transmission of
acquired food preferences from adult to weanling rats. In L. Barker,
M. Best, & M. Domjan (Eds.), Learning mechanisms in food
selection (pp. 123-150). Waco, TX: Baylor University Press.
Galef, B. G., Jr. (1987, August). Tradition and social learning: De-
scription of subpopulation-typical patterns of behavior and analyses
of their development. Paper presented at the International Etholog-
ical Congress, Madison, WI.
Galef, B. G., Jr. (1988). Imitation in animals: History, definition, and
interpretation of data from the psychological laboratory. In T.
Zentall & B. G. Galef, Jr. (Eds.), Social learning: Psychological and
biological perspectives (pp. 3-28). Hillsdale, NJ: Earlbaum.
Galef, B. G., Jr., & Clarke, M. (1971). Social factors in the poison
avoidance and feeding behavior of wild and domesticated rat pups.
Journal of Comparative and Physiological Psychology, 75, 341-
357.
Gandolfi, G., & Parisi, V. (1973). Ethological aspects of predation by
rats, Rattus norvegicus (Berkenhout), on bivalves Unio pictorum L.
and Cerastoderma lamarcki (Reeve). Bollettino di Zoologia, 40,
69-74.
Giraldeau, L. A., & LeFebvre, L. (1987). Scrounging prevents cultural
transmission of food-finding behavior in pigeons. Animal Behav-
iour, 35, 387-394.
Goodall, J. (1971). In the shadow oj man. London: Collins.
Hamilton, W. J., Buskirk, R. E., & Buskirk, W. H. (1978). Environ-
mental determinants of object manipulation by chacma baboons
(Papio ursinus) in two southern African environments. Journal of
Human Evolution, 7, 205-216.
Harlow, H. F. (1951). Primate learning. In C. P. Stone (Ed.), Com-
parative psychology (pp. 183-238). New York: Prentice-Hall.
Kellogg, W. N., & Kellogg, L. A. (1933). The ape and the child. New
York: McGraw-Hill.
Kluver, H. (1933). Behavior mechanisms in monkeys. Chicago: Uni-
versity of Chicago Press.
Kummer, H., & Goodall, J. (1985). Conditions of innovative behav-
iour in primates. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society,
London, 308, 203-214.
Mahan, T. L., Jr., & Rumbaugh, D. M. (1963). Observational learning
in the squirrel monkey. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 17, 686.
McGrew, W. C. (1977). Socialization and object manipulation of
wild chimpanzees. In S. Chevalier-Skolnikoff & F. E. Poirier (Eds.),
Primate bio-social development (pp. 261-288). New York: Garland
Publishing.
McGrew, W. C., Tutin, C. E., & Baldwin, P. J. (1979). Chimpanzees,
tools, and termites: Crosscultural comparisons of Senegal, Tanza-
nia, and Rio Muni. Man, 14, 185-214.
Nishida, T. (1986). Local traditions and cultural transmission. In B.
Smuts, D. Cheney, R. Seyfarth, R. Wrangham, & T. Struhsaker
(Eds.), Primate societies (pp. 462-474). Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
All rights, including for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies, are reserved.

PDF PAGE 12
170 DOROTHY M. FRAGASZY AND ELISABETTA VISALBERGHI
Palameta, B., & LeFebvre, L. (1987, August). Culturally transmitted
foraging behavior in pigeons: Learning mechanisms and ecological
correlates. Paper presented at the International Ethological Con-
gress, Madison, Wl.
Payne, R. B. (1987, August). Cultural transmission of song traditions
in birds. Paper presented at the International Ethological Congress,
Madison, WI.
Rogoff, B., & Wertsch, J. (1984). Children's learning in the "Zone of
Proximal Development. "San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Romanes, G. J. (1883). Animal intelligence. New York: Appleton.
Terborgh, J. (1983). Five New World primates. Princeton, NJ: Prince-
ton University Press.
Thorndike, E. L. (1911). Animal intelligence. New York: Macmillan.
Tomasello. M., Davis-Dasilva, M., Camak, L., & Bard, K. (1987).
Observational learning of tool-use by young chimpanzees. Journal
of Human Evolution, 2, 175-183.
Vevers, G., & Weiner. J. (1963). Use of a tool by a captive capuchin
monkey (C'ebus apella). Symposium of the Zoological Society of
London, JO, 115-118.
Visalberghi, E. (in press). The acquisition of nut-cracking behavior in
two capuchin monkeys groups (C'ebus ape/la). Folia Primatologica.
Visalberghi, E., & Fragaszy, D. M. (1988). Food-washing behavior in
capuchins and crab-eating macaques. Manuscript submitted for
publication.
Visalberghi, E., & Fragaszy. D. M. (in press). Do monkeys ape? In S.
Parker & K. Gibson (Eds.), Comparative developmental psychology
of language and intelligence in primates. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Wechklin, S. (1970). Social relationships and social facilitation of
object manipulation in Macaco mulatto. Journal of Comparative
and Physiological Psychology, 73, 456-460.
Werner, T., & Sherry, T. (1987). Behavioral specialization in Pina-
roloxias inornata, the "Darwin's Finch" of Cocas Island, Costa
Rica. Proceedings of National Academy of Science of the United
States of America, 84, 5506-5510.
Westergaard, G. C. & Fragaszy, D. M. (1987). The manufacture and
use of tools by capuchin monkeys (Cc'bus apella). Journal of
Comparative Psychology, 101. 159-168.
Zentall, T. R.. & Galef. B. G.. Jr. (Eds.). (1988). Social learning:
Psychological and biological perspectives. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Received June 13, 1988
Revision received October 12, 1988
Accepted October 13, 1988
Low Publication Prices for APA Members and Affiliates
Keeping You Up-to-Date: All APA members (Fellows; Members; and Associates, and Student Affiliates)
receive—as part of their annual dues—subscriptions to the American Psychologist and the APA Monitor.
High School Teacher and Foreign Affiliates receive subscriptions to the APA Monitor and they can subscribe
to the American Psychologist at a significantly reduced rate.
In addition, all members and affiliates are eligible for savings of up to 50% on other APA journals, as well as
significant discounts on subscriptions from cooperating societies and publishers (e.g., the British Psychological
Society, the American Sociological Association, and Human Sciences Press).
Essential Resources: APA members and affiliates receive special rates for purchases of APA books,
including the Publication Manual of the APA, the Master Lectures, and APA's Guide to Research Support.
Other Benefits of Membership: Membership in APA also provides eligibility for low-cost insurance
plans covering life; medical and income protection; hospital indemnity; accident and travel; Keogh retirement;
office overhead; and student/school, professional, and liability.
For more information, write to American Psychological Association, Membership Services,
1200 Seventeenth Street NW, Washington, DC 20036, USA.
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
All rights, including for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies, are reserved.