PDF PAGE 1
Christophe Boesch 
Hedwige Boesch 
Department of Ethology and 
Wildlife Research, Institute of 
Zoology, University of Zurich, 
Birchstrasse 95, GH-8050 Zurich, 
Switzerland 
Received 20July 1981 and 
accepted 24 July 1981 
Keywords: Chimpanzees, sex 
difference, tool-use. 
Sex Differences in the Use of Natural 
Hammers by Wild Chimpanzees: A 
Preliminary Report 
The chimpanzees of the Tai National Park, Ivory Coast, use clubs and 
stones to open different species of nuts. An intriguing sex difference ha* 
been observed in this behavior. It is almost exclusively females that open 
Coula nuts directly in the tree and crack the very hard Panda nuts. 
Both techniques are difficult and imply either anticipating the need of a 
hammer and its transport, or exact positioning of the nut and precise 
dosage of the hits. The efficiency of females is superior to that of males 
in the technique of cracking Coula nuts on the ground, which is per- 
formed by both sexes. Possible implications for the evolution of tool-use 
in humans are discussed. 
1. Introduction 
Among primates, sexual division of labour and active food sharing are features observed 
exclusively in hominids. Division of labour is always regarded in a complementary way, 
each sex being dependent on a part of the other's activity (Isaac, 1978). The only excep- 
tion in subhuman primates are the chimpanzees, which show a partial division of labour 
(van Lawick-Goodall, 1968, 1975; McGrew, 1979; Teleki, 1973, 1975). Hunting, a 
typical male activity in humans, is also a predominantly male activity in chimpanzees, 
the females obtaining some meat through begging. So far, however, we knew of no speci- 
fically female technique of foraging which would have prepared the way for two-way food 
sharing among the sexes. McGrew (1979) recently noted a beginning of sex difference in 
the termite-fishing technique. The females have a tendency to fishmorefrequentlythanthe 
males, but males do not beg or receive termites from females. We present in this paper a 
case of sexual difference in the use of "hammers and anvils" to crack nuts by wild chim- 
panzees (Pan troglodytes verus). There is, however, no evidence that males profit from the 
particular skills of females. These are the first results of a three-year project which started 
in July 1979. 
2. Methods 
Our study site is located in the western part of the Tai National Park, 20 km east of the 
nearest village, Tai, situated near the Liberian border. The park covers 350,000 hectares 
and is the biggest remain left of the tropical rain forest of West Africa. Our community of 
about 40 chimpanzees lives without significant human disturbance. The closest traditional 
plantations are situated 10 km from their home range limit, and the native tribes, the 
Oubi and Gu6r6, do not hunt chimpanzees for totemic reasons. We did not provision 
the chimps, but followed them by their vocalizations. The visibility in the forest is very 
low, i.e. 30 m or less. These distances are far too short to be tolerated by the chimpanzees. 
Therefore, habituation is very slow and, so far, we could only observe nut-cracking chim- 
panzees when they did not notice us. The fact that 4200 field-hours yielded only 62 hours 
of actual observation reflects the difficult observation conditions. We therefore had to 
recur to listening. When several animals crack nuts at the same time, we can easily 
distinguish one cracker from the other because the hammers are of different size, weight 
Journal of Human Evolution (1981) 10, 585-593 
0047-2484[81]070585+09 $02.00]0 9 1981 Academic Press Inc. (London) Limited 


PDF PAGE 2
586 C. BOESCH AND H. BOESCH 
and density, and therefore produce different sounds. The directions from which the 
sounds come are an important help. As soon as we can hear one cracker distinctly, 
usually the nearest one, we approach it and record its hammering by focal-animal 
sampling (Altmann, 1974). We determine its age and sex by sight as soon as possible, 
distinguishing infants, juveniles, adolescents, and adults (van Lawick-Goodall, 1968, 
1975). The sample ends when the animal stops cracking nuts, either spontaneously or 
because it has noticed us. 
The Coula nut opens with a distinct crack. The opening of a Panda nut starts with 
powerful strikes which then decrease in intensity. From our usual working distance of 
30 m, the number of cracked nuts can thus be determined accurately even when the focal 
animal is not visible. To compare the performance of the different individuals, we 
use two measures based on these acoustic observations: (a) number of hits delivered to 
open one nut, and (b) number of nuts opened per minute. Since we cannot see the focal 
animal during most of the sample time the second measure includes the time spent eating 
and collecting new nuts. It is presumably influenced by thctors other than pounding skill, 
such as hunger and proximity of nuts to the work site. 
3. Description of the Nut-cracking Technique 
The chimpanzees use tools to open five different species of nuts (Boesch & Boesch, in 
prep.) but we have sufficient observation data only for two species: Coula edulis and Panda 
oleosa. The chimpanzees use different techniques to open Coula and Panda, and we briefly 
describe them here. A more complete description will be presented elsewhere (Boesch & 
Boesch, in prep.). To feed upon both nut species, chimpanzees use a hard surface as an 
anvil, e.g. a rock or root emerging fi'om the soil, and a stone or a wooden club as a hammer 
(for choice of material see Boesch & Boesch, in prep.). We never saw a chimpanzee open 
nuts without a hammer and an anvil. 
Coula edulis ( Olaceae) 
This is a spherical nut of 2-3 cm in diameter, consisting of a 2 mm shell and one round 
kernel which is directly attainable when the shell is opened. They are cracked on anvils 
in two different locations: (a) On the ground and (b) in the tree. 
(a) On the ground, the chimpanzee first collects about 12 to 15 nuts by picking them in the 
tree or, later in the season, by collecting them on the ground, and carries them to an 
anvil, i.e. a surface root close to the nut tree or a nearby flat rock. Most of the root- 
anvils show a depression or a hole produced by previous nut-cracking. In 75 ~/o of 
the 748 recorded Coula-cracking places on the ground, a hammer, most frequently a 
wooden club, lay on or beside the anvil. When no hammer was near, the chimpan- 
zees were seen to look for an appropriate one and carry it to the anvil in one hand. 
They would then sit down and start to pound the nut, holding the hammer with one 
or both hands. Each nut is immediately eaten after opening and thehammermean- 
while rests on the ground. Before beginning to work on the next nut, the shells are 
brushed from the anvil with one hand. Nuts are usuallycollected several times during 
one feeding session. 
(b) The animal may choose to open the nuts directly in the tree, using a horizontal branch 
as an anvil. In this case, it must always anticipate its action by looking for a hammer 
before climbing into the tree. While carrying the hammer in a hand or a foot, the 


PDF PAGE 3
SEX DIFFERENCE OF TOOL-USE IN CHIMPS 587 
chimpanzee picks the nuts and stores them in its mouth and a hand. It then chooses 
a branch as an anvil for pounding the nuts. To us, the subsequent behaviour in the 
tree resembles the performance of an equilibrist. The animal cracks a nut with one 
or both hands while holding the rest in the mouth and one foot. To eat the nut, 
the mouth has to be freed by transferring the nuts to one hand while the hammer 
is held with one foot or left to balance on the branch. To continue the cracking, the 
hand has to be freed again by putting the nuts back to the mouth, and so on. Often, 
to prevent the pounded nut from falling from the anvil, the animal retains it on the 
branch with the thumb and the forefinger of one hand between hits. To collect more 
nuts, the hammer is carried or left balanced on the anvil. Obviously, cracking nuts 
in the tree implies better co-ordination of more movements than doing so on the 
ground. On the other hand, nuts can be reached within arm's-length or collected 
at a few meters from the anvil. This is an obvious advantage compared to the chim- 
panzee who has to climb at least 15 In up a tree and down again for each load of nuts 
to open them on the ground. 
Panda oleosa ( Pandaceae) 
This is an egg-shaped nut of 5-6 cm length, containing three or four boat-shaped almonds 
which are circularly arranged, each one separately hemmed in a thick hard shell covered 
by sticky husk. Chimpanzees open them only on the ground and on fairly big surface roots 
around the Panda tree or on nearby rock outcrops. A chimpanzee collects 4-6 nuts at a 
time on the ground and carries them in its hand to the anvil. Only once out of 25sessions 
did we see an animal carrying Panda nuts in its mouth. As in the case of roots used for 
Coula, most roots show a depression made by previous Panda cracking. The chimpanzees 
were not seen to produce such holes except by simply placing the nut always on the same 
spot. Only stones are used as hammers, as the hardness of the nut almost completely 
excludes the use of a club. Stones have to be transported hundreds of meters if there are 
none at the anvil. As our own frequent attempts taught us, careful positioning and a pre- 
cise dosage of hits are required to open the nut without smashing the almonds. Powerful 
hits are necessary to begin the opening procedure. Gentle, carefully placed ones must fol- 
low for freeing the almonds one after the other, demanding a precise control of the 
animal's strength. 
4. Results 
Table 1 presents the number of animals of each age-sex class in which we saw cracking 
Coula and Panda nuts, during the two nut seasons of November to May 1979-81. The 
danger of counting the same animal twice in one feeding session is low, because the chim- 
panzees leave immediately when they have noticed us. It is evident that two techniques 
were observed and used almost exclusively by females: cracking Panda and cracking 
Coula in the trees. Obviously, these results have to be compared to the age-sex composi- 
tion of the community, which we could only estimate, since we did not know animals 
individually. Therefore, we recorded age and sex of all chimpanzees which we saw in- 
volved in other activities than nut-cracking (Table 2). We also differentiated between 
animals observed on the ground and in the trees, since unequal arboreality could be 
responsible for the male/female difference in Coula pounding in the tree. The total fre- 
quency of males and females encountered is not significantly different from an expectation 


PDF PAGE 4
588 C. BOESCH AND H. BOESCH 
based on a sex ratio of 1:1 for our community (X 2 ----- 0-86, d.f. = 1, NS). The distribution 
of animals seen in the trees and on the ground when they did not open nuts is the same for 
both sexes (2 X 2 contingency table X ~ = 1-70, d.f. = I, NS). We can therefore reject a 
bias due to one sex being generally more arboreal than the other. Another possible bias 
could be that males and females are more likely to be found in unisexual groups. The data 
in Tables 1 and 2, collected on 142 and 162 groups, respectively, suggest the contrary: 
When we were able to identify two individuals of the same group, they were of a different 
sex in about 50% of the cases (X 2 = 0"66, d.f. = 1, NS). 
TaMel Number of animals of each age-sex class cracking nuts, 
observed in a total of 142 encounters 
Coula 
f "3 
Sex and age On the ground In the tree Total Panda 
Male 
Adult 34 2 36 2 
Adolescent 1 1 2 -- 
Juvenile 1 2 3 -- 
Female 
Adult 57 41 98 35 
Adolescent 5 4 9 2 
Juvenile 3 9 12 3 
Infant 1 1 2 -- 
Total 102 60 162 42 
Table 2 Number of adult animals of both sexes seen when not nut- 
cracking, observed in a total of I62 encounters 
Sex On the ground In the trees Total 
Male 69 72 141 
Female 65 92 157 
Total 134 164 298 
In comparing the results of Tables 1 and 2, the sex difference for Panda is highly signi- 
ficant in favour of the adult females (2  2 contingency table X 2 ----- 23-63, d.f. ~ 1, 
P -< 0.001). For the Coula technique on the ground, the statistical test is not significant 
(2 X 2 contingency table X ~ = 2.79, d.f. = 1, NS). That is, both sexes use it with equal 
frequency. The difference between the Coula technique in the tree and on the ground is 
significant (2 X 2 contingency table X 2 = 15.9, d.f. = 1, P .< 0-001) in ikvour of the 
adult females cracking Coula in the trees. 
There are several biases which could lead to the observed sex difference in favour of 
females, and we discuss here why they can probably be ruled out. 
(a) When not cracking nuts (Table 2) : In order to find and to follow the chimpanzees, 
we oriented ourselves by the vocalization and drumming of males. Thus, we could 
have found males more often than females. As mentioned above, however, the sex 
ratio of two-member samples was close to I : I. The artifact would therefore require 
an incredibly high proportion of females in the community. 


PDF PAGE 5
SEX DIFFERENCE OF TOOL-USE IN CHIMPS 589 
(b) In the Panda-cracking situations (Table 1) : If males spotted us earlier than females 
and departed silently without being noticed by us, this might cause a bias favouring 
females. The visibility in the forest, however, is about the same for observing 
Coula-cracking on the ground and for Panda-cracking. Table t shows that in 
Coula-cracking on the ground, males and females were equally often observed. We 
therefore reject this bias; it is highly improbable that males would react differently 
to us only when cracking Panda. 
(c) In the situation of cracking Coula in the tree, the argument that the males spotted 
us earlier than the females could again be forwarded. The observations on Coula 
crackers on the ground suggested no such difference. Why would males react 
differently towards us when in the trees ? The visibility on the ground is higher than 
from the tree, due to the dense foliage between 5-30 m in height. The chimpanzees 
which collect nuts see us much quicker when cracking on the ground than in the 
tree. During the first ten minutes of recording, we were seen by four out of 32 
crackers in trees and by 21 out of 47 crackers on the ground. Visual contacts with 
tree crackers are only possible when we are close to the tree (15 m) or, if by chance, 
there is an opening in the vegetation. If males were more inclined than females to 
spot a human from afar, the difference should therefore take effect on the ground 
and not in the trees, as this criticism requires. 
These sex differences are striking because they have a common aspect. Cracking 
Coula in the tree and cracking Panda are both more complex and different techniques 
than cracking Coula on the ground. They are also almost exclusively female activities. 
The difference between subadults is not significant, but shows a similar tendency, 
suggesting a learning or maturation process. The only two males we observed cracking 
Coula in a tree did it at tile same time and in the same tree as an oestrous female;this may 
be significant in that they presumably followed her. 
Differences in efficiency were noted during the two nut seasons. Mean values of effi- 
ciency measures were first calculated for each observed individual and were used for the 
statistical tests. Table 3 presents the overall means by each age-sex class. The following 
conclusions can be drawn: 
(a) Cracking Panda nuts is more time- and energy-consuming than cracking Coula. 
This may be seen by comparing the efficiency between adult females cracking Panda 
and Coula on the ground (Mann-Whitney U-/test:hits/nut, P ~ 0.001 ; nuts/rain 
P < 0"001, Siegel, 1956). 
(b) Comparing the results for adult females and males, it appears that the females seem 
to be more efficient in both measures in cracking Coula on tl~e ground (Mann- 
Whitney U-/test :hits/nut P ~ 0-01 ; nut/rain P < 0.01). 
(c) Comparing the efficiency of the adult females cracking Coula on the ground and in 
the tree does not reveal any difference (Mann-Whitney U-/test :hits/nut NS; nut/min 
NS). About half of these measures (29 and five respectively) were taken on animals 
who were observed cracking for less than 10 minutes (usually subsequently dis- 
turbed by us) and did not collect nuts a second time during their feeding session. 
In order to test our hypothesis that cracking Coula nuts directly in the tree presents 
the advantage of saving time for collecting the nuts, we compared the efficiency of 
females cracking for 10 or more minutes on the ground versus in trees. In this 
comparison, the first efficiency measure, hits/nut, is again the same (Mann- 


PDF PAGE 6
b~ 
t4 
w~ 
C~ 
I,i 
q~ 
I,i 
~ 
c~ 
6 
~ 
~ ~ ~" 
~o 
ct~ ~ 
bs~ 
0 
g 


PDF PAGE 7
SEX DIFFERENCE OF TOOL-USE IN CHIMPS 591 
Whitney U-test, NS). This indicates that females master the additional difficulties 
of cracking in the tree without additional hits per nut. The second measure, 
nuts/minute, however, is significantly greater in trees than on the ground (Mann- 
Whitney U-test, P < 0"02), and thus supports our hypothesis. 
(d) The learning process of the technique is a long one and extends into adolescence. 
From our data we can only compare the females' performance of cracking Coula in 
the tree. The difference between juveniles and adolescents is significant for both 
measures (Mann-Whitney U-test:hits]nut P < 0.02; nuts/min P < 0.01). The 
differences of both measures between adults and adolescents is not significant. 
Termite-fishing and ant-dipping are techniques which are normally acquired by old 
juveniles (McGrew, 1977). We conclude, therefore, that the learning of nut-pounding is 
more difficult and requests a longer apprenticeship. 
5. Discnssion 
The results presented in this paper are apparently among the first to show a distinct sex 
difference in technique and efficiency of tool behaviour by any animal (Beck, 1980). As 
mentioned earlier, McGrew (1979) reported that female chimpanzees at Gombe fish for 
termites more frequently than males, but he did not mention a sex difference in efficiency. 
In our opinion, the tool techniques of chimpanzees show a gradient in difficulty ranging 
from termite-fishing to Coula-cracking on the ground, to Coula-craeking in the tree 
and Panda-cracking. Termite-fishing might be easier than the Coula nut-cracking on the 
ground for the fbllowing reasons: 
(a) For termite-fishing, the tools are picked up at a shorter distance from the working 
site than in Coula-cracking. 85-94% of tile fishing tools are collected within arm's 
reach (McGrew et al., 1979), whereas only 75% of the hammers for cracking Coula 
are found on the anvil or at arm's length. 
(b) The hits in cracking must presumably be aimed more precisely and their strength 
be controlled within narrower limits than the probes in termiting. 
(c) In termite-fishing, the success of each probe can be directly perceived by retrieving 
the tool. In cracking a nut each hit reduces its resistancy, but this cannot be per- 
ceived; it has to be learned. A stroke which is too powerful can smash the nut, 
leaving hardly anything edible. 
Even greater difficulties are met in cracking Coula nuts in the tree, because in this case 
the use of a hammer must be anticipated already before climbing the tree. For cracking on 
the ground the animal must think of the tool only after it has perceived the nuts; for crack- 
ing on the tree, it must do so before. When deciding to crack on the ground, it usually sees 
both the anvil and the hammer; when deciding to crack in the tree, it sees none of the 
three requisites simultaneously. It also requires faultless transfers of hammer and nuts 
between the mouth, hands and feet between phases of work. 
Panda-cracking also appears more difficult than Coula-cracking on the ground, as it 
requires exact positioning of the nut at least three times during the opening process and 
a precise dosage of strength. Furthermore, some of the stone transports for Panda-cracking 
imply high cognitive capacities (Boesch & Boeseh, in prep.). 
The gradient from termite-fishing to Coula-cracking in trees and Panda-cracking is 
accompanied by the apparition of a sex difference in tool-use. The two most difficult 


PDF PAGE 8
592 c. BOESCH AND I-I. BOIBSCII 
techniques are almost exclusively used by females. Why is there such a sex difference and 
how does it appear during ontogenesis ? In order to find a key to the problem, we forward 
the following six hypotheses. They are not mutually exclusive and should explain all or 
part of the difference. 
(1) Females are more dependent on the proteins contained in nuts, whereas males 
obtain more proteins through hunting. 
(2) Males are more attentive to the social stimuli of the group and therefore use the only 
technique performed in groups and where the visual conditions permit a good con- 
trol of the group members: that is Coula-cracking on the ground (preliminary 
results suggest that Panda-cracking is done only by single animals or in pairs). 
(3) Males lack concentration while cracking nuts and this makes them so inefficient at 
Coula-cracking in the trees and Panda-cracking that these techniques are of no 
interest to them. 
(4) Males have more difficulty in controlling their emotions when using a tool to open 
nuts. Stones and clubs are sometimes part of their displays and therefore are 
emotionally loaded. This could negatively affect their motor control of a task that 
demands great precision. 
(5) Female subadults are more motivated than subadult males to observe and learn the 
nut-cracking behaviour and, therefore, master the techniques more quickly and 
efficiently. 
(6) Chimpanzee mothers take an active part in the apprenticeship of their female 
offspring by either rewarding their attention with nuts or affection or by supplying 
them with tools (such incidents have been observed). We shall attempt to test these 
hypotheses with the data that will be available at the end of the three-year project. 
The observations we made on the Tai chimpanzees might shed new light on the evolu- 
tion of human tool-use. When analysing human stone technology, anthropologists rely 
mainly on lithic materials, of which the most characteristic ones axe the flaked stones. Our 
first suggestion is that flaked stones could have been produced by chance. We noted that 
female chimpanzees produced flaked stones by pounding the hard Panda nut, three times 
when using a granite stone and once with a quartzite stone. These chimpanzee-made 
artifacts suggest that such tools could have been produced by early hominids when they 
used stones as hammers in a gathering activity. Secondly, one tends to imagine that the 
makers of early human stone implements were men. Isaac (1978) refers to a "male bias". 
The skill of female chimpanzees at Tai suggests the possibility that the first human tool- 
makers were women. 
The chimpanzees represent a stage in tool evolution which may give us some insight 
into motivational differences of the sexes when working with tools. Their investigation 
might help to clarify the puzzle of how sexual division of labour emerged in human 
ancestors. 
This study was supported by grant No. 3.391.78 from the Swiss National Foundation to 
Prof. Hans Kummer. We are greatly indebted to the Minist~re de la Recherche Scienti- 
fique de la C6te d'Ivoire for allowing us to work in the Tai National Park. This project 
is integrated in the UNESCO Project TAI-MAB and we wish to thank the general super- 
visor of the project, Dr Henri Dosso, for his support. 


PDF PAGE 9
SEX DIFFERENCE OF TOOL-USE IN CHIMPS 593 
We are very grateful to the following people: Prof. A. Aeschlimann for his constant 
support and encouragement; Prof. H. Preuschoft for his advice in the planning stage; 
J. F. Graf, M. Knecht and M. Gremaud, directors of the Centre Suisse de la Recherche 
Scientifique in Abidjan, for their kind and efficient logistic help; Prof. E. Boeseh, V. 
Dasser and E. Stammbach for critical reading of the manuscript; M. Gore for correcting 
the English text, and J. Stocker for typing the manuscript. Finally, we wish to express 
particular thanks to Prof. H. Kummer for his valuable guidance, critical discussion and 
moral support throughout the study. 
References 
Altmann, J. (1974). Observational study of behavior: sampling methods. Behavior 49, 227-267. 
Beck, B. B. (1980). Animal Tool Behavior. New York: Garland STPM Press. 
Boeseh, C. and Boesch, H. (in prep.). Optimization of nut-cracking in wild chimpanzees. 
Isaac, G. (1978). The food-sharing behavior of protohuman hominids. Sdentifio American 238, 90-108. 
McGrew, W. (1977). Socialization and object manipulation of wild chimpanzees. In (S. Chevalier- 
Skolnikoff and E. Poirier, Eds), Primate Bio-social Development: Biological, Social and Ecological Determinants, 
pp. 159-187. New York: Garland Publishing Co. 
MeGrew, W. (1979). Evolutionary implications of sex differences in chimpanzee predation and tool-use. 
In (D. Hamburg and E. McCown, Eds), Perspectives on Human Evolution, vol. 5. pp. 441-463. Menlo Park, 
Ca. : Benjamin/Cummings. 
McGrew, W., Tutin, C. and Baldwin, P. (1979). Chimpanzees, tools and termites : cross-cultural comparisons 
of Senegal, Tanzania and Rio Muni. Man 14, 185-214. 
Siegel, S. (1956). Non Parametric Statistic. McGraw-Hill Kogakusha Ltd. 
Teleki, G. (1973). The omnivorous chimpanzee. Scientific American 228, 32-42. 
Teleki, G. (1975). Primate subsistence patterns: collector-predators and gatherer-hunters. Journal of 
Human Evolution 4, 125-184. 
van Lawiek-Goodall, J. (1968). The behavior of free-living chimpanzees in the Gombe Stream Reserve. 
Animal Behavior Monographs 1, 161-311. 
van Lawick-Goodall, J. (1975). Chimpanzees of Gombe National Park: 13 years of researeh. In (I. Eibl- 
Eibesfeldt, Ed.), Hominisation und Verholtens. Stuttgart: Gustav Fischer Verlag. 
